---
title: Impacts of Sea Level Rise regarding Baselines and Reduction of National Territory
linktitle: Ipsen | Impacts of Sea Level Rise regarding Baselines and Reduction of National Territory
type: book
date: '2019-05-05T00:00:00+01:00'
# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 2
---

**by Johannes Ipsen**

## Introduction

Climate change and its consequences are undeniably in the top ranks of the most pressing issues of our time and yet still ignored by many.[^1] It is becoming an increasingly strong and destructive phenomenon that requires the attention of legal framework approaches to address its impacts. The window of opportunity stands slightly open, calling for swift but cautious decision making, as the next ten years have been heralded in scientific assessments as a ‘critical decade’ for action on climate change.[^2] In the field of the International law of the Sea, the rise of the sea level is of particular interest, as it raises questions concerning the determination of (shifting) baselines, the reduction of national territory and even the disappearance of States.

[^1]: United Nations (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, p. 5 (para. 14). Available at: http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E.
[^2]: See McDonald, J., McGee, J., & Barnes, R. (2020). Oceans and coasts in the era of Anthropogenic climate change. Research Handbook on Climate Change, Oceans and Coasts, 2–26. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788112239.00006.

According to the worst-case scenario stated by the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (hereinafter abbreviated as IPCC), the sea level is estimated to rise between 0,61 m and 1,10 m until 2100.[^3] Even from a slightly more optimistic perspective, the sea level is likely to increase about 29 cm.[^4] When taking a look at the newest evidence, that slight optimism is likely to disappear again though, as current sea levels are higher than any forecast expected them to be by now.[^5] Those figures may seem insignificant at first glance, but already induce remarkable and somewhat disastrous consequences for some countries. For instance, it is estimated that with a rise of only 21 cm of the sea level 316-411 million people will be affected by this global development by 2060.[^6] A living example of what lies ahead is the Republic of Kiribati, a nation of low-lying islands and atolls in the central Pacific. The rising ocean has broken through freshwater ponds on some islands, threatening numerous communities, some villages will submerge and even whole islands were already swallowed by the sea.[^7] By 2100 the country is likely to be completely uninhabitable.[^8] But not only islands are in danger, coastal States are concerned by this progressing development. The sea level rise will cause damages to the coastal environment and will result in disappearance of national territory.[^9]

[^3]: Michael Oppenheimer and Bruce C. Glavovic and Jochen Hinkel and Roderik van der Wal and Alexandre Magnan and Amro Abd-Elgawad and Rongshuo Cai and et. al (2019). IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, p. 324
[^4]: Ibid, p. 324.
[^5]: See Jonathan Tirone (2021). Sea Levels Are Rising Faster Than Most Pessimistic Forecasts.
[^6]: B. Neumann and AT. Vafeidis and J. Zimmermann and R. Nicholls (2015). Future Coastal Population Growth and Exposure to Sea-Level Rise and Coastal Flooding in PLoS ONE, p. 19; Oppenheimer, p. 376.
[^7]: @Klepp2013Klimabewegung p.4; @Kirby1999Islands; @KiribatiClimate
[^8]: @Klepp2013Klimabewegung pp. 4 f.; See for visualization @Mulhern2020Sea.
[^9]: @Oppenheimer2019Sea pp. 367 ff.

Baselines are of great importance for the functioning of the United Convention of the Law of the Sea[^10] and therefore also for States, as baselines distinguish internal waters from territorial waters acting as a boarder between territorial sovereignty of States (in internal waters) and territorial rights (in the territorial sea) according to Art. 8 para 1 UNCLOS, Art. 2 para 1 UNCLOS.[^11] Furthermore, baselines serve as the crucial point for defining other maritime zones.[^12] The coastal State has different rights in each zone according to the UNCLOS. Thus, the exact classification of the maritime zones is of great importance, especially for the coastal States. This can be important for other States as well, that (respectively “represented by” private people flying its flag) enter into zones which are under the jurisdiction of another state. Normal baselines are linked to or in some points of views[^12a] are the actual low-water line according to Art. 5 UNCLOS. Thus, it is quite obvious that rise of the sea level will shift them and the maritime zones landwards under the assumption that baselines are ambulatory. Consequently, the range of the rights of coastal States will be _de facto_ reduced in terms of the range of the rights into the sea and their influence in these areas compared to their actual range. Thence, it is in the interest of the affected States to keep the current baselines to ensure their influence in the areas concerned.

[^10]: @1994United; hereinafter abbreviated as UNCLOS.
[^11]: @Tanaka2019International p. 53.
[^12]: See therefore in example Art. 3 UNCLOS for the territorial sea or Art. 33 UNCLOS for the contiguous zone.
[^12a]: @Nelson2012Sofia p. 31

Beyond this, the complete vanishing of a State due to sea level rise raises additional concerns. Unfortunately, the countries especially threatened by this extreme consequence are among those, that contributed least to climate change itself – small island States. Due to their proximity to water, they are especially vulnerable to the marine effects of climate change like sea level rise, ocean acidification, marine heatwaves, and the increase in cyclone intensity.^[See therefore: @Thomas2020Climate] Not only are their maritime zones usually bigger than their territory, which makes them particularly sensitive to possible shrinking of their baselines as discussed in the preceding paragraph.

Additionally, the total disappearance of a nation is completely unregulated. Neither the UNCLOS, where the regime of islands is regulated in Article 121, nor the UNs “Small Island Developing States”^[Hereinafter abbreviated as SIDS.] framework which intended to strengthen the endangered States, create any procedures for this scenario.[@Werksman2014Could pp. 409 ff.] Whilst the interest of the SIDS might be to keep their regime over the parts of the ocean, that where once home to their population, the compatibility of this wish with the Law of the Sea is unclear. Furthermore, not just uncertainty over physical, but over the abstract statehood itself arises – closely entangled with public international law that requires population, territory and government to form a State, the Law of the Sea might be pathbreaking for preserving or dissolving the existence of the country, depending on how to judge the submerging turf.^[Simplified representation of State theory, see Part 5 for more information. See also @Bergmann2016Versinkende pp. 50, 51; For different theories see @BlanchetteSeguin2018Preserving pp. 239 ff.]

This chapter aims to assess and discuss possible solutions regarding the problems raised above within the scope of the UNCLOS. Firstly, it will provide an analysis of the impacts of climate change, particularly focusing on the rise of the sea level and its consequences for States, as this is the ground on which both problems are based on. Furthermore, it offers an introduction to the different maritime zones and other maritime features, pointing out their core elements.

The authors will then provide general information about baselines under the UNCLOS and will discuss the ambulatory character of those. Based on the decision regarding the ambulatory character of baselines, the question of legal responses regarding this matter will be at the center of this chapter: on the one hand the possible reactions of States according with the UNCLOS, and on the other hand the method of “freezing” either of current baselines or rather of current outer limits of different maritime zones. These options will be compared and discussed in light of influencing factors such as the effectiveness of each. Ultimately the possibility of the legal incorporation of these solutions will be forwarded.

In hindsight of the SIDS, the regimen over the maritime entitlements of the disappeared state becomes unclear and therefore will be investigated. As only States are entitled to claim maritime zones, the question whether a state could continue to exist if its land is completely submerged by the sea or so much of it is under water that it cannot sustain sufficient population to have the required an "*economic life of its own*"^[Art. 121 para 3 UNCLOS.], arises.[@Aurescu2019Sea p. 329; @Schofield2013Options p. 149] Therefore, without a habitable territory or permanent population, the existence of low-lying atoll island States becomes increasingly uncertain.

Each part will close with a conclusion summarizing the suggestions of those two problems, ultimately finishing with solutions the authors find the appropriate ones.

## Current state of climate change

The impacts of climate change are becoming more noticeable. The warming of the climate in general, natural catastrophes, melting of glaciers and sea level rise are just some examples of climate change. [@Team2014Climate pp. 13 ff.] These impacts partly correlate with each other, as the warming of the climate will lead to the melting of glaciers which results in a rise of the sea level. Climate change is a process contributed to by different factors. One of these factors are greenhouse gases which are also caused by humankind.^[Greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) as stated in Annex A, @1997Kyoto; see also @Team2014Climate p. 5.] The rise of greenhouse gases will increase the so called greenhouse effect, ultimately contributing to climate change and in particular to sea level rise. It can be observed, that human beings are major contributors to climate change and sea level rise. Besides the sea level rise itself, marine spaces are in the course of climate change additionally endangered by acidification of the and a temperature rise in the ocean, very likely respectively with high confidence caused by human beings according to the IPCC.[@Carr2013Sea pp. 16 f.; @Team2014Climate pp. 45 ff.; @Team2014Climate p. 88]

Exact forecasts for the sea level rise are not possible, as many factors contribute to the rise (for instance, the amount of greenhouse gases emitted by humans). Because of these uncertainties, there exist different scenarios and studies about the sea level rise weighing factors differently. The IPCC reviewed all relevant studies and combined them into a forecast about what rise can be expected by 2100. According to the IPCC the sea level "*will rise between 0.43 m (...) and 0.84 m (...) by 2100 (...) relative to 1986-2005*". [@Oppenheimer2019Sea p. 324] According to the worst-case scenario taken into account by the IPCC, the sea level will rise up to 110 cm. [@Oppenheimer2019Sea p. 328 figure 4.3] Other studies have even suggested shifts from 75 to 190 cm until 2100. [@Vermeer2009Global p. 21530] However, these figures cannot be applied globally, as notable regional variability of sea level rise can be observed (e.g.:Eastern Pacific and Western North Atlantic increase less than global rise of sea level, whilst the Western Pacific and Central Indian Ocean increase the most).[@Oppenheimer2019Sea p. 324; @Carr2013Sea p. 25 f.]

Failing to prevent the climate change to activate multiple interacting "tipping points"^[The term “tipping point” commonly refers to a critical threshold at which a tiny perturbation can qualitatively alter the state or development of a system; See @Lenton2008Tipping p. 1786.] — such as the loss of the Amazon rainforest or the West Antarctic ice sheet — may accelerate this processes tremendously.^[See @Lenton2019Climate pp. 592-595.] As evidence arises that tipping points are under way, the ‘optimal policy’ recommendations to prevent the disastrous onset align with those of the recent IPCC report: Global warming must be limited to 1.5 °C, an emergency response is required.[Overall estimated goal of limitation according to the IPCC, see therefore @Allen2018IPCC pp. 8 f.; @Lenton2019Climate pp. 592-595.]

According to the IPCC low-lying small islands States are among the most affected by climate change and in particular by sea level rise, as they are wholly surrounded by water. [@Team2014Climate p. 13] Especially little islands are vulnerable, as they have a high ratio of coastline compared to their land mass. [@Carr2013Sea p. 40; @Nunn2009Responding p. 211] Although the extreme effects of the rising sea (loss of territory) will not be experienced in the same intensity on every coastline[@Carr2013Sea p. 43; @Webb2010dynamic pp. 240 f.], the less obvious results of the rising sea will affect everybody falling into this category: flooding, erosion, loss and change of ecosystem, salinisation of soils, ground and surface water and impeded drainage[@Oppenheimer2019Sea p. 374 f.; see also @Carr2013Sea p. 42], marine heatwaves, and the increase in cyclone intensity.[@Klepp2013Klimabewegung pp. 4 f.] As the SIDS have limited capacity to adapt to those circumstances and have their population and infrastructure located close to the coasts, exposing these features to the impacts of climate change, the impact of these consequences worsens.[@Carr2013Sea pp. 40 f.; @Nunn2009Responding p. 212]

Against this background, unsurprisingly it is projected that among the first States that will wholly disappear are mainly small island nations. The Republic of Kiribati is an example for such a nation. It is estimated that the island State will wholly disappear by 2100 at latest.[@Klepp2013Klimabewegung pp. 4 f.; See also @Mulhern2020Sea] But not only such low-lying island States are affected, even larger countries and other continents will be. Worldwide, the sum of all coastline equals about 1 Million km, which shows the significant extent of coastline affected by sea level rise. [@Schubert2006Die p. 40] Some of those coastline States lie beneath the sea level. This does not just include  SIDS: The Netherlands show a vivid example, as around 25 % of the country lie beneath the sea level. [@Butzengeiger2004Meeresspiegelanstieg p. 4] Without protectional steps (e.g. dykes) this land would be flooded and life would not be possible as it is nowadays. [@Butzengeiger2004Meeresspiegelanstieg p. 4]

Climate change causes various impacts and is manly caused by human beings. The sea level will rise until 2100 between 0,29 and 110 cm, which mainly - but not just exclusively - puts low-lying islands and its inhabitants into danger. This means, climate change is a phenomenon which must be regulated by legal frameworks to address its destructive impacts.

## Marine Spaces and maritime Features under the UNCLOS

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea operates with a spatial division of the ocean to reconcile the interests of States.^[@Tanaka2019International p. 5; classifying this as one of the two paradigms of the Convention.] Through this division, several different zones with differing rights over each zones are established. Those zones can be categorized by the influence of the coastal States in these zones. On the one hand there are zones which are under the national jurisdiction of the coastal States. ^[Namely internal waters, territorial sea, archipelagic waters, the contiguous zone, the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf.] On the other hand, zones which lie beyond national jurisdiction can be identified.^[Namely the high seas and the area.] Certain maritime features can alter the zones.

### Maritime Zones

To be able to understand the problematics originating from rising sea levels, we have to understand the maritime zones and their effects.

#### Internal Waters

Internal waters are "*those waters which lie landward of the baseline from which the territorial sea is measured*",^[See Art. 8 UNCLOS.] but do not include rivers, lakes and other land-locked waters or waters within the land territory.^[@Tanaka2019International p. 95] According to Art. 2 para 1 UNCLOS States enjoy full and exclusive territorial sovereignty over internal waters as they do over other territory. There is no right of innocent passage in or rather through this zone, however, special circumstances can induce lawful ways of passage.^[For these exceptions see Art.8 UNCLOS; @Tanaka2019International pp. 96 ff.]

#### Territorial Waters

"*The sovereignty of a coastal State extends beyond its land territory and internal waters (...) to an adjacent belt of sea, described as the territorial sea (.)*" ^[Art. 2 para 1 UNCLOS.], which can be established to a maximum breadth of 12 nautical miles measured from the baseline. ^[Art. 3 UNCLOS.] These rights extend not only on the surface but also to the seabed and subsoil, as well as vertically to airspace [@Burgess2017Law p.12], but, in contrast to the internal waters can only be "*exercised subject to the Convention (of the UNCLOS)* (paranthesis through author) *and to other rules of international Law*" ^[Art. 2 para 3 UNCLOS.]. Furthermore, the coastal States’ rights are limited by the passage rights of other States, including innocent passage through the territorial sea and transit passage through international straits. ^[Art. 17 UNCLOS, Art. 37 UNCLOS.] Thus, it can be concluded that the coastal State enjoys a somewhat limited territorial sovereignty over the territorial sea.

#### Archipelagic Waters

An archipelago is "*a group of islands, including parts of islands, interconnecting waters and other natural features which are so closely interrelated that such islands, waters and other natural features form an intrinsic geographical, economic and political entity, or which historically have been regarded as such*".^[Art. 46 lit.b UNCLOS.] Archipelagic States may draw archipelagic baselines uniting the outermost points of the outermost islands of the archipelago and calculate the breadth of their maritime zones from those lines - the waters enclosed by those lines fall under the regime of archipelagic waters.[@Dipla2012Islandsa No.B.5.18]

#### The Contiguous Zone

The contiguous zone exists to bolster a coastal states law enforcement capacity.[@Burgess2017Law p.12; @Tanaka2019International p.146] There, it can exercise control to prevent violations of its customs and other financial laws, immigration or health laws and other related regulations on its territory or its territorial sea.^[Art. 33 UNCLOS.] It must not extend more than 24 nautical miles beyond the baseline.^[Art. 33 UNCLOS.]

#### The Exclusive Economic Zone

The exclusive economic zone ^[Hereinafter abbreviated as EEZ.] is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea, where it establishes a confined and specific legal regime. This zone can reach a maximum expanse of 200 nautical miles measured from the coastal States baseline ^[Art. 57 UNCLOS.], which leads to, when the worlds EEZs combined, an 38% coverage of the whole ocean.[@Burgess2017Law p.13] In this area, the nation holds sovereign rights for the purpose of exploration, exploitation, conservation and management of the living (such as fish) and non-living natural resources (such as oil and gas) of the waters above the seabed, the seabed itself and its subsoil, as well as sovereign powers with regard to the construction and use of artificial islands, facilities and structures, scientific marine research and the protection and preservation of the marine environment.^[Art. 58 UNCLOS; @Burgess2017Law p.13.] In accordance with Art. 58 UNCLOS, the Art. 87 - 115 UNCLOS (relating to high seas rights), apply to the EEZ as far as they are compatible with the regulations stated in Part V of the Convention. This means, unlike the territorial sea and the contiguous zone, the EEZ only allows for the previously mentioned resource rights and the law enforcement capacity to protect those rights and does not give a coastal State the right to prohibit or limit freedom of navigation or overflight.[@Tanaka2019International pp.153 f.] This is, amongst other important factors, one of reasons for the polarisation of these zones.^[See for reasons of polarisation @Attard1989Exclusive]

#### The Continental Shelf

The continental shelf is a natural seaward extension of the land mass.^[Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS.] This seaward extension is geologically formed as the seabed slopes away from the coast, typically consisting of a gradual slope (the continental shelf proper), followed by a steep slope (the continental slope), and then a more gradual slope leading to the deep seabed floor. [@Burgess2017Law p.13] To this prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin, the UNCLOS allows a State to conduct economic activities, limited to non-living resources and sedentary living resources (such as shellfish).[@Burgess2017Law p.13; @Tanaka2019International p.161] However, the Convention offers an option for legal fiction to measure "*a distance of 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured where the outer edge of the continental margin does not extend up to that distance*"^[Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS.], to avoid iniquities for States that do not possess such geological conditions. The rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf exist *ipso iure*,^[Art. 77 para 3 UNCLOS.] however, if a State possesses a continental shelf that extends farther than 200 nautical miles from its shoreline, it has 10 years to submit a claim for the extension after it ratified the UNCLOS.[@Augustyn1998Continental p.4]

#### The High Seas and "The Area"

According to the UNCLOS, the ocean surface and the water column beyond the EEZ are referred to as the high seas, whilst the seabed beyond the limits of national sovereignty is summarized under the neutral collective term *"Area"*.^[Art. 1 No. 1 UNCLOS.] The high seas and the area are international common spaces,^[Other State free areas are Antarctica and the space with its celestial bodies.] meaning, they are not subject to any States sovereignty,^[Art. 89 UNCLOS.] but only to the corresponding international law regime. [@Burgess2017Law p. 14] States can conduct activities in these spaces as long as they are for peaceful purposes, such as transit, marine science, and undersea exploration.[@Burgess2017Law p.14] Natural resources are a much more complicated matter, but of little concern for the question at hand.^[See for more insights into the problematics around natural resources @Brown1988See]

### Maritime Features

Among others ^[Bays, Rivermouths.], the following maritime features can influence the way maritime zones are drawn. These features are also endangered in the process of the sea level rise.

#### Islands

Islands are naturally formed land areas surrounded by water on all sides, which must be above the water at high tide and theoretically be able to sustain human habitation or economic life of their own.^[Art. 121 UNCLOS.] ‘Land’ normally means an elevation of the sea bed created through natural phenomena and consisting of soil or other types of earth material (sand, mud, gravel deposits, limestone mixed with coral debris, etc) but not ice.[@Dipla2012Islandsa No.B.1.3] Islands possess the same maritime zones as other landmasses, including a territorial sea, contiguous zone, EEZ, and continental shelf.[@Burgess2017Law p.16; @Tanaka2019International p.75] Through special regulations regarding archipelagos, they can create archipelagic waters, basically a 'weakened form' of internal waters.^[Art. 50 UNCLOS.]

#### Rocks

Rock is a legal term and does not refer to any particular type of geological formation ^[E.g. sandbar.] and cannot sustain human habitation or economic life of their own.^[Art.121 para 3 UNCLOS; @Burgess2017Law p.16; It is questioned by some, whether or not it is sensible to deny the formation of marine zones only taking into account socio-economic factors. See therefore @Tanaka2019International p.77.] They only provide territorial waters and the contiguous zone.^[Art. 121 para 3 UNCLOS.]

#### Reefs and Atolls

Reefs are formations of coral, roughly shaped like mountains, which run just below the surface of the water.[@Burgess2017Law p.16] An atoll is a small, ring-shaped reef with or without coral island(s) situated on it, surrounded by the open sea that encloses or nearly encloses a lagoon.[@Tanaka2019International p. 85] Here, the Law of the Sea Convention states, that "*(i)n  the  case  of  islands  situated  on  atolls  or  of  islands  having  fringing reefs,  the  baseline  for  measuring  the  breadth  of  the  territorial  sea  is  the seaward low-water line of the reef, (...).*"^[Art. 6 UNCLOS.]

- Low-Tide Elevations

"*A low-tide elevation is a naturally formed area of land which is surrounded by and above water at low tide but submerged at high tide.*"^[Art. 13 para 1 UNCLOS.] These elevations do not create any zones of maritime control on their own,^[Art. 13 para 2 UNCLOS.] but "*(w)here a low-tide elevation is situated wholly or partly at a distance not exceeding the breadth of the territorial sea from the mainland or an island, the low-waterline on that elevation may be used as the baseline for measuring the breadth of the territorial sea.*"^[Art. 13 para 1 UNCLOS.]

- Artificial islands, Installations, and Structures

States have the right to construct artificial islands, installations and structures within their EEZ.^[Art. 60 UNCLOS.] Since they are not naturally occurring, artificial features do not create a territorial sea, contiguous zone, EEZ, or continental shelf.[@Burgess2017Law p.16; Exceptions have been made, for more information see @Dipla2012Islandsa No.B.1.4]

## Baselines

### Functions and Purposes of Baselines

Against the background of the differing national influence of the coastal State in each maritime zone, it is necessary to establish these. The UNCLOS bases the division of marine spaces on distances, starting the measurement from the baseline. [@Carleton2001Developments p. 17; @Prescott2005maritime p. 93; @Truempler2007Grenzen p. 29] According to Art. 3 UNCLOS "*every State has the right to establish the breadth of its territorial sea up to a limit not exceeding 12 nautical miles, __measured from baselines__* (emphasis added) *determined in accordance with this Convention.*". The same procedure can be observed for other zones, for instance the EEZ, the contiguous zone as well as the continental shelf. ^[See Art. 33 para 2 UNCLOS for the contiguous zone, Art. 57 UNCLOS for the EEZ and Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS for the continental shelf; all stating the measurement "_from the baselines (...)._"] Thence, the first function of baselines can be identified: they act as a key point to define the different maritime zones. [@Lathrop2015Baselines p. 70; @Prescott2005maritime p. 93; @Schofield2009Shifting p. 407]

According to Art. 2 para 1 UNCLOS "_the sovereignty of a coastal State extend, beyond its land territory and internal waters, (...) to an adjacent belt of the sea, described as the territorial sea._" The paranthesis of "_beyond its land territory and internal waters_" indicates that coastal States enjoy the same rights in both the land territory and in internal waters, namely territorial sovereignty.[@Barnes2017Article Art. 2 UNCLOS para 16; @Lathrop2015Baselines p. 70; @Truempler2017Article Art. 8 UNCLOS para 14; @Proelss2019Raum para 38; @Soons2020Effects p. 361] Internal Waters lie according to Art. 8 para 1 UNCLOS "*(...) on the landward side of the baseline of the territorial sea (...)*". Thus, baselines distinguish internal waters from territorial waters acting as a boarder between territorial sovereignty of States and other (territorial) rights assigned to the coastal States.[@Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 19 f.; @Schofield2009Shifting p. 407; @Tanaka2019International p. 53]

Furthermore, baselines become important where two States share overlapping maritime areas addressed by Art. 15 UNCLOS. To agree on maritime boundaries and the limits of each marine zone between those States or if failing a delimitation by court, baselines may serve as a starting point to construct an equidistance or a median line. [See in example: @2001Judgment pp. 94 f. para 174 - 177; @Alexander1983Baseline p. 524; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 20 f.; @Schofield2009Shifting p. 407]  

Thence, baselines play an important role in the International Law of the Sea and have essentially a threefold purpose [@Rothwell2016International p. 33; @Nelson2012Sofia p. 5]: they serve as a starting point for measuring different maritime zones and the delimitation of State territory from marine spaces and are relevant for overlapping zones between two States.

### Methods of establishing Baselines under UNCLOS

States can establish baselines in a few ways in accordance with the UNCLOS. These various ways of creating such are a result of specific geographic coastal situations in which the application of normal baselines would just be impractical. [@Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 2] Starting with the normal baselines, this part provides an overview over the different methods of establishing baselines in accordance with the UNCLOS.

#### Normal baseline

The normal case of a baseline is defined by Art. 5 UNCLOS as "*(...)the low-water line along the coast as marked on large-scale charts officially recognized by the coastal State.*". Normal baselines consist of two elements, _the low-water line_ and the official marking on the _large-scale charts_ by the coastal State, which will be examined in the following.

##### Low-water line

The Convention does not offer a precise definition regarding the term "_low-water line_".[@Rothwell2016International p. 42; @Proelss2019Raum para 39] Thus, States enjoy discretion in choosing an appropriate low water line.[@Tanaka2019International p. 54] Nevertheless, the level of the low-water line is dependent on the vertical datum which is used as the level of the sea rises or falls (because of tides).[@Prescott2005maritime p. 94; @Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para. 8] However, the vertical datum is neither defined in the UNCLOS, leading to various possibilities in choosing the "right" vertical datum, ultimately giving States also discretion in that regard as any vertical datum ^[Reaching from the Lowest Low Tide (LLW) over the Lowest Astronomical Tide (LAT) over the mean lower low-water springs (MLLWS) to mean sea level (MSL); note that this is a non-exhaustive and only exemplary list of tidal datums.] used by a State is legitimate.[@Prescott2005maritime p. 96; @Proelss2019Raum para 39] The "right" choosing of the vertical datum cannot be underestimated for States as the low water line will move in accordance to the datum used either land- or seawards (in direction of the sea when using the LAT).^[See therefore @Prescott2005maritime p. 95] However, it can be observed that the LAT has been used by most States as this is the preferred datum by the International Hydrographic Organization. [@Organization2018Resolutions Res. 3/1919, A2.5 last amendment in 10/2017 no. 6; @Prescott2005maritime p. 96; see also @Proelss2019Raum para 39 footnote 132] The LAT can be described as "_the lowest tide level which can be predicted to occur under average meteorological conditions and under any combination of astronomical conditions._"[@HDWG2019S no. 2962; @Carleton2001Developments p. 22] This seems to be advantageous as the low water line of the LAT lies further seawards, ultimately increasing marine entitlements as well as acting as an "_aid to safe navigation_" [@Schofield2009Shifting p. 408].

##### Charts

The second element of Art. 5 UNCLOS contains charts, on which the low-water line is marked on. The Convention is deficient in providing a legal definition of charts. However, charts are usually understood as nautical charts. [@Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 30] Such can be defined as "*a chart specifically designed to meet the requirements of marine navigation, showing depths of water, nature of bottom, elevations, configurations and characteristics of coast, dangers and aids to navigation.*"[@HDWG2019S no. 744] Noting this definition, the purpose of charts becomes obvious: they serve primarily the function of safeguarding the navigation at sea. [@Nelson2012Sofia p. 33] Therefore, it can be concluded that charts mainly adopt to new circumstances merely to draw attention to navigational hazards as to act as a navigational aid. ^[@Nelson2012Sofia p. 33; @Lathrop2015Baselines pp. 76 f.; @Prescott2005maritime p. 96; also the scale of the large-scale chart is not defined. However, the discussion of this is beyond the scope of this paper, for further reading, see: @Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 32 ff.]

##### Relationship between these elements

As the low-water line along the coast forms the normal baseline "*as marked on large-scale charts*" the relationship between those elements of Art. 5 UNCLOS must be clarified. Essentially, this revolves the question if baselines have an ambulatory character or if the charted baselines are the decisive legally binding lines. The answer to this question is of great importance in light of sea level rise, as on the one hand baselines would adopt to the sea level rise or on the other hand not. Thus, whether or not baselines have an ambulatory character has been subject of legal discussion. Therefore, two main interpretations can be observed in this regard.

Firstly, as the Convention indeed is silent on the movement of baselines when actual circumstances change, it is arguable to assume the charted baselines to be the legally binding ones, once these are established in accordance with the requirements of the Convention. [@Carleton2001Developments pp. 24 f.; @Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 15-22: at least stating 'that it seems (...) possible to interpret the history as also indicating that the charted low-water line is to be considered as the baseline.'] Additionally, the historical development of Art. 5 UNCLOS might speak for this interpretation. ^[For a detailed analysis of the history, see @Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 19-22.] In this regard the term of "_large-scale charts_" could be brought forward as a point favoring this position, as these "would not be necessary to fix the chart datum".[@Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 22] Finally, the English wording "_as marked on_" could also indicate a certain legally binding of the charted line. ^[@Nelson2012Sofia p. 8; which nevertheless is not in line with the meaning of the terms in other official languages of the UNCLOS; @Nelson2012Sofia p. 8.]

Albeit, the International Law Association emphasizes that "charts and the stated charted line played an indirect role in defining the word 'low-water'", ultimately concluding that "the original role of the charted line was neither to illustrate nor to be the normal baseline" and therefore opposing the historical interpretation of the latter interpretation. [@Nelson2012Sofia p. 9] Moreover, supporters of the opposite position ^[Supporting the ambulatory character: @Nelson2012Sofia p. 31, reassured in 2018 by @Vidas2018Sydney pp. 11 f.; @Lathrop2015Baselines pp. 76 f.; @Caron1990When pp. 634 f.; @Caron2009Climate p. 9; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 269; @Freestone1991International pp. 114 f.; @Soons2020Effects p. 364; @Tanaka2019International p. 55; @Proelss2019Raum para 39.] strengthening the influence of the actual low-water line on the legally binding baseline point out that the UNCLOS does indeed know a certain state of permanence. Art. 76 para 9 UNCLOS states that "*(t)he coastal State shall deposit (...) charts and relevant information (...)__permanently__* (emphasis added) *describing the outer limits of its continental shelf.*" Also, Art. 7 para 2 UNCLOS addressing straight baselines states that "*the straight baselines shall remain __effective__* (emphasis added) *until changed (...)*". In the regulations regarding the normal baseline such a term of permanence is not included. Thus, it can be, in turn or by negative implication, concluded that the baseline shown on charts is not of a permanent state (argument _a contrario_). [@Nelson2012Sofia p. 8; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 269; @Caron1990When pp. 634 f.; @Caron2009Climate pp. 9 f.; @Schofield2009rising p. 74 footnote 16] Additionally, an ambulatory character would be in line with the principle of "_Land dominates the Sea_" as the baseline would be constituted by the actual circumstances and the actual low-water line. [@Lathrop2015Baselines p. 78] Accompanying with this, the delimitation of maritime zones would not be decoupled from actual circumstances as these are distance-measured from the baseline, ultimately maintaining the community interest in non-exclusive marine spaces as the formerly EEZ would fall into the area of the high seas (resulting from the principle of the *freedom of navigation*). [@Lathrop2015Baselines p. 78] Furthermore, it would serve the purpose of charts as shifts of baselines landwards, which are not shown on a map, might cause hazards and are therefore also of importance for the navigational safeguarding. [@Lathrop2015Baselines p. 78]
Two judicial decisions, namely the ICJ Judgment in the case Nicaragua v. Honduras ^[@2007Judgment Although baselines were not challenged by the States, the court did not recognize the deposited satellite pictures to demonstrate the actual low-water line as they were differing from the actual low-water line. Accordingly, the satellite pictures '(could not) be properly used as a base point.' @2007Judgment p. 743.] as well as the arbitral decision in the arbitration between Guyana and Suriname ^[@2007Award in which the exact delimitation of the baseline was at challenge: Guyana did not recognize the baselines as shown on charts from Suriname as these differed from the actual low-water line; the Court did not grant this proposal; @2007Award para 396. However, the court assessed the evidence provided in a way to find out, if the coordinates are like the actual low-water line.] seem to tend to an ambulatory character of baselines.

While this a debatable issue, the systematic argument as well as the function and purposes of charts argue more convincingly in favor of an ambulatory character of baselines. Thus, the preferable view appears to be that baselines do indeed have an ambulatory character, although it should be noted that this issue cannot be answered finally and in its entirety as this would go beyond the scope of this paper.

Howbeit, the position preferring the ambulatory character of baselines is divided regarding the point of updating charts. Thinkable is an automatic or real-time provision of updates or a requirement for updates only where there are significant changes in the coastline. The provision of real-time charts, in which every change in the coastal configuration is shown, seems to be too impractical as well as too expensive. [@Lathrop2015Baselines p. 78; @Tanaka2019International p. 55] In light of the purpose of the charts (safeguarding of navigation), it can thus be argued that only (important) coastal changes will affect the safeguarding of navigation. Thence, it would be reasonable to update the charts where there are significant changes in the coastline to satisfy the purpose of the charts as to prevent navigational hazards. [@Lathrop2015Baselines p. 78; @Freestone1991International p. 115; @Tanaka2019International p. 55]

To conclude, the ambulatory character of baselines will be taken as a basis for the following discussion of solutions regarding the influence of the sea level rise on baselines. Thus, baselines represent and are the actual low-water line regardless the baselines shown on the charts. Nonetheless, even charts which have not been updated for some time still serve their designated function, the safeguarding of navigation when there is no significant change in the coastline. However, it is still desirable that States update their charts regularly to satisfy the needs of the ambulatory character of baselines.

#### Other baselines

Besides normal baselines in Art. 5 UNCLOS, the Convention provides different regulations providing other methods of establishing baselines. The purpose of the other methods is to adopt to specific ("subnormal") geographic issues and needs. [@Truempler2017Article Art. 5 para 2.] Concerned by this consideration are straight baselines ^[Art. 7 UNCLOS.], baselines around river mouths ^[Art. 9 UNCLOS.], baselines around bays ^[Art. 10 UNCLOS.], baselines at Low-tide elevations ^[Art. 13 UNCLOS.] as well as the regime of archipelagic baselines ^[Art. 47 UNCLOS.].

Of certain interest regarding the addressed issue by this paper are straight baselines, calling for a short comment on them. According to Art. 7 para 1 UNCLOS, it is permitted to draw straight baselines "*where the coastline is deeply indented and cut into, or if there is a fringe of islands along the coast in its immediate vicinity*". States can then draw baselines from appropriate points. Where there is a delta or a highly unstable coastline exists, the appropriate points may lie along the furthest seaward extent of the low-water line according to Art. 7 para 2 UNCLOS. In this case, such drawn baselines "*remain effective until changed by the coastal State*". ^[See Art. 7 para 2 UNCLOS.] However, it is worth noting that "*the drawing of straight baselines must not depart to any appreciable extent from the general direction of the coast (...)*" according to Art. 7 para 3 UNCLOS. Details regarding straight baselines are highly debatable. For the purpose of this paper, a fundamental understanding of straight baselines seems to be adequate.

### impacts of climate change on baselines

Against the background of the ambulatory character of normal baselines, these will shift landwards when the low-water line moves landward as a consequence of sea level rise. The landward movement of baselines is concomitant with a new base for the measuring of the maritime zones, ultimately leading to a shift of these zones in the direction of the land compared to the current situation. [@Mayer2020Climate p. 357; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 268; @Hayashi2011Sea p. 190] Affected by this development will be all distance-measured zones, namely the territorial sea, the contiguous zone, (partly) the continental shelf and the EEZ. Although a slightly shifting of baselines landward might seem at first glance insignificant in proportion to the breadth of the EEZ (in example a shift of 2 nm landward is comparatively small when looking at the 200 nm breadth of the EEZ), it must be noted that such a shift has a proportionally bigger influence on the territorial sea. [@Bird1989Rising p. 193] Still even a loss of two nm of the EEZ is of interest for the coastal State, as it is estimated that around 87 % of the world´s undersea hydrocarbon reserves are located in the seabed and subsoil in the EEZ and the continental shelf. [@OceanAffairsUnited section about the EEZ.] Also, the coastal State would lose the possibility of regulating the fishery ^[Namely the prohibition of fishery, price regulations and general conditions.] in the EEZ ^[As stated in Art. 61 ff. UNCLOS.] as the "lost" area would fall into the high seas and would be open for the usage of all States in accordance with Art. 87 UNCLOS. [@Powers2013Introducing p. 131, p. 133] In other words, the influence and the rights assigned to the coastal State shift in direction of the land going along with a loss of influence in the outermost marine space compared to the influence nowadays. It seems to be clear that most States do not favor such a development, but would rather like to keep their influence as it is currently.

However, as sea level rise in general comes with regional differences, the actual shift of baselines will differ from region to region accordingly.^[@Vidas2018Sydney p. 9; see section 2: Current State of Climate change; @Bird1989Rising pp. 192 f.] To plasticize this, in some regions a rise of only 50 cm of the sea level could lead to a potential shift landwards of tens of kilometers of the baselines. [@Soons2020Effects p. 364; @Mayer2020Climate p. 357: stating a potential loss of hundreds of km with a one meter rise] In the worst case scenario of a complete submerge of a low-lying coastal State baselines of these States will disappear because Art. 5 UNCLOS requires a coast on which the low-water line runs. [@Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 38]

Summarizing, coastal States potentially face a great loss of resources as their claims for different marine spaces shift landwards provided an ambulatory character of baselines. Thus, the influence of climate change on baselines cannot be underestimated.

## Solutions to the problem of landward shifting baselines

This paper only examines solutions in the situation where there are neither agreements between States nor arbitrational or adjudicational settlements for the delimitation of maritime boundaries.^[For further reading on this matter, see in example: @Soons1990effects pp. 226 ff.; @Arnadottir2020Effects chapter 19, pp. 382-406] The legal discussion for such situations would go beyond the scope of this paper. Basically, this section deals with the pure situation of a coastal State that is able to claim rights over maritime zones in accordance with the UNCLOS. In a first step, proposed solutions will be presented and in a second step the consequences of each approach will be examined.

### "Business as usual"-actions

First of all, this section focuses on possibilities which are in line with the UNCLOS. They are all characterized by the fact that they can be undertaken by all treaty parties without "changing" the legal base laid down in the UNCLOS in order to minimize the impacts of sea level rise. Therefore, these will be called "business as usual"-actions.

#### Do-Nothing approach

The most obvious approach would be a 'do-nothing' approach, as Schofield points out. [@Schofield2013Options p. 150; @Schofield2009Shifting p. 410; @Schofield2009rising p. 76] Essentially, baselines would be left to their fates including all the impacts as aforementioned. ^[See section 4.3.] However, this would not be in the interest of States, as they would lose both territory and influence in maritime zones seawards when the baselines shift in the direction of the land. Especially, countries that are endangered by a complete loss of territory (as a result of a complete submergence)^[See for problems raised in the issues of a complete submergence the part about disappearing States of this chapter.] would not favor such an approach as these do not posses enough territorial extents for a relocation of their population. [@Schofield2009rising p. 76; @Schofield2013Options pp. 150 f.] Thence, Schofield concludes rightly that such an approach would be politically unacceptable. [@Schofield2013Options p. 150] Besides this, a "do-nothing" approach seems to be somewhat unfair in the light of causing the climate change which leads to sea level rise. The most affected States are often not the States that have caused the climate change.[@Moritaka2013Islands p. 10; @Powers2013Introducing pp. 139 f.; @Proelss2019Raum para 39]

#### Maintaining current baselines

Another possibility is to maintain the current baseline in an artificial way (shoreline protection). Examples can be seen inter alia in the use of dykes, sea walls or wave reduction structures.[@Schofield2013Options p. 151; @Schofield2009Shifting p. 411; @Rayfuse2009Whither p. 4; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen pp. 219 f.] Such a protection of baselines is in line with public international law. This is the result of the practice of States ^[In example Japan protecting their island called Okinotorishima.] which has not been challenged by other States ^[The actions by Japan have only been challenged regarding the question if Okinotorishima is an island in accordance to Art. 121 UNCLOS.]. It can be therefore presumed that the artificial maintaining of coastlines is approved by customary international law. [@Soons2020Effects p. 371; @Schofield2013Options p. 151; @Vidas2018Sydney p. 10; @Soons2020Effects pp. 370 f.; @Soons1990effects p. 222; @Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 40; @Nelson2012Sofia p. 30; @Stephens2015Warming p. 794] However, the maintaining of baselines will find at some point an end. The costs for the artificial maintenance will be high - it is estimated that the protection of Okinotorishima cost Japan about 200 million US-Dollar. ^[@Schofield2013Options pp. 155 f.; @Caron2009Climate p. 13 speaking of billions of yen] Besides the general high costs to preserve the current baseline [@Schofield2013Options p. 152; @Stephens2015Warming p. 793; @Caron1990When p. 640; @Soons1990effects p. 222; @Vidas2018Sydney p. 11], the effectiveness of this in proportion to the costs will decrease, ultimately making such a way inappropriate for coastal States.[@Truempler2017Article Art. 5 UNCLOS para 40; @Caron2009Climate p. 13; @Moritaka2013Islands p. 10; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 277] Additionally, this approach can have problematic consequences for other States [@Schofield2013Options p. 153], Schofield describing them as "knock on effects" [@Schofield2009Shifting p. 411], e.g. the interruption of natural sediments flows as well as the danger of unexpected erosion or deposition to other parts of the coast. [@Schofield2013Options p. 152]

#### Usage of and maintaining 'appropriate points'

Against the background of high costs and the ineffectiveness of maintaining the whole current baselines, some [@Freestone1991International p. 112; @Schofield2013Options p. 159; @Stephens2015Warming p. 792;  @Hayashi2011Sea pp. 191 f.] have suggested a greater usage of straight baselines in accordance with Art. 7 UNCLOS. They argue that States could draw their attention not to the protection of the whole baseline, but rather on appropriate points, which could serve as points for the drawing of straight baselines in accordance with Art. 7 UNCLOS. These may, as mentioned above, be drawn by States where a coastline is deeply intended or cut into. ^[See Art. 7 para 1 UNCLOS.] When the conditions of Art. 7 para 2 UNCLOS are met, straight baselines shall remain effective until changed by the coastal State. Rayfuse points out the possibility of including low-tide elevations as appropriate points to draw straight baselines by building a lighthouse or similar installations in order to meet the requirements of Art. 7 para 4 UNCLOS. [@Rayfuse2010International p. 5; see also @Soons1990effects p. 223] In contrast to maintaining the whole current baseline, this would be a lot cheaper in terms of expenses of States. As straight baselines have the same functions as normal baselines, they would act as the decisive baseline in order to establish the maritime zones. Thus, the loss of territory as well as the influence seawards can be minimized.
Nevertheless, care should be taken that straight baselines may only be drawn when a coast is deeply intended or cut into and additionally in the case of the usage of straight baselines that these "*(...) must not depart to any appreciable extent from the general direction of the coast (...)*" according to Art. 7 para 3 UNCLOS. In the case of such an appreciable deviation from the actual coastline, the drawing of straight baselines would not be in line with the Convention any more. ^[Although details in Art. 7 UNCLOS are surely under debate; see in example @Andreone2017Future p. 8.]

#### Establishment of permanent continental shelfs

Further seawards, States could also make greater usage of establishing their continental shelfs in accordance with Art. 76 UNCLOS. [@Stephens2015Warming p. 792; @Soons1990effects pp. 216 f.; @Rayfuse2010International p. 5;  @Hayashi2011Sea pp. 192 f.] Part VI of the Convention is dedicated to the continental shelf regime and stipulates two alternatives of continental shelfs, the geological, natural continental shelf and the legal continental shelf. ^[See Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS.] The natural continental shelf relies on certain geological conditions and extends beyond 200 nm ^[See therefore Art. 76 paras 1, 3, 4 UNCLOS.]. Where there are not the geographical conditions in order to extend the continental shelf beyond 200 nm, continental shelfs "*extend to a distance of 200 nm*". ^[See Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS.] The geological continental shelf will not be affected by sea level rise as the geological conditions will not change due to sea level rise. [@Powers2013Introducing p. 129] When these are declared, it is beyond dispute that the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nm are fixed permanently according to Art. 76 para 9 UNCLOS.

Still, it is unclear, if Art. 76 para 9 UNCLOS was intended to legally fix the boundary only of continental shelfs beyond 200 nm or whether if it includes both alternatives of the continental shelfs laid down in Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS. ^[pro: @Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 124; @Soons1990effects pp. 216 f.; @Lagoni2006Festlandsockel para 70 stating that the alternatives are meant to be handled of equal rank; @Moritaka2013Islands p. 7; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 270; @Soons2020Effects pp. 365 ff.; against: @Churchill1999law p. 149; @Hayashi1995Role p. 159 although it seems that he has changed his view on this; see therefore: @Hayashi2011Sea p. 193; @2002Oceans para 78; @Nelson2006Toronto p. 234 Conclusion No. 12, although "it should be noted that several members of the Committee advances the view that article 76 (9) UNCLOS applies also to the outer limit of the continental shelf at 200 nautical miles."] For an application of this paragraph only on continental shelfs beyond 200 nm it could be argued, that the preceding paragraphs (Art. 76 para 2-8 UNCLOS) only address such shelfs extending beyond 200 nm. [@Nelson2006Toronto p. 234] Additionally, Art. 84 para 1 UNCLOS ^[Stipulating that: "*(...) the outer limit lines of the continental shelf (...) shall be shown on charts of a scale or scales adequate ascertaining their position.*"] could lose its applicability (as long as the outer limit lines are in question) when both shelfs would be seen as permanently established under Art. 76 para 9 UNCLOS. [@Nelson2006Toronto p. 234]

However, it seems to be more convincing to treat the 200 nm continental shelfs not differently from the natural continental shelfs, once they are declared in accordance with Art. 76 para 9 UNCLOS. Firstly, the wording of Art. 76 para 9 UNCLOS does not differentiate between the alternatives of the continental shelfs. [@Elferink2006Article p. 282; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 123; @Busch2018Sea p. 178] This, in contrast, can be observed in the preceding paragraphs addressing the outer limits of continental shelfs beyond 200 nm. ^[All of them including a similar phrase, such as: "*continental shelf __beyond 200 nautical miles__* (emphasis through author)".] Moreover, the purpose of the permanent state of the outer limits could be described as a final and binding delineation of the continental shelf and the international seabed to provide legal certainty. In this light, it seems inappropriate to stabilize only one of the two alternatives of the continental shelf. [@Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 270; @Soons1990effects p. 217; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen pp. 122 f.] Furthermore, it seems unfair that the fate (permanent or not) of the continental shelf would be left to its chances; in other words, States which possess such geological features would be given an advantage in light of the (permanent) extension of their influence. [@Soons1990effects p. 217; @Moritaka2013Islands pp. 7 f.; @Busch2018Sea p. 178] Against this background, it can be argued that both continental shelfs must be of a permanent state, ultimately fixing all declared continental shelfs permanently. This would keep declared continental shelfs unaffected by sea level rise, leading to a spatial increase of continental shelfs. [@Hayashi2011Sea p. 193; @Stephens2015Warming p. 792; @Powers2013Introducing p. 129] However, this approach would only safe marine entitlement which a State can exercise over the continental shelf in accordance with Art. 76 ff. UNCLOS, namely only jurisdiction over the seabed and the subsoil. ^[See therefore Art. 76 para 1 UNCLOS.] Thus, the establishment of permanent continental shelfs would only help States in a minor scope.

To conclude, this problem can partly be handled by existing regulations of the UNCLOS. However, these approaches prove to be either unattractive (Do-Nothing approach), too expensive (maintaining the whole current baselines), are only working until a certain limit (until an appreciable deviation from the coastline) or are only solving the situation partly (establishment of continental shelfs). Thus, other approaches have been proposed, which will be subject in the following.

### Freezing

The idea of decoupling the delimitation of the maritime zones from the actual low-water line forms the basis of the following approaches. In other words, all approaches are informed by the idea of delimiting the marine zones by a legal fiction regardless the actual circumstances. Such a legal delimitation is often referred to with the term of "freezing" of current limits.

#### Maintaining the current baseline or freezing the status quo

Some scholars [@Stephens2015Warming p. 793; @Moritaka2013Islands p. 11; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 232 proposes this method for the time being; @Jesus2003Rocks pp. 602 f.; @Hayashi2011Sea pp. 196 ff.; @Rayfuse2013Sea pp. 188 ff.; @Caron1990When p. 623 suggests a "*(...) system in which the boundaries of all maritime zones (...) are fixed on the bases of presently accepted baselines.*"; @Caron2009Climate pp. 16 f.] have suggested to freeze baselines, making them in essence - in legal terms - legally binding. This fiction correlates with keeping the outer limits as well, as these are distance-measured from the baseline. [@Soons2020Effects p. 375] Stoutenberg proposes a freezing of both baselines and outer limits [@Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 276]. However, this approach can be reached by the freezing of the baselines as (most of) the outer limits are established by distance from the baseline.
As the zones would still be determined from the baselines, most of them would keep their designated breadth. [@Soons2020Effects p. 375; @Hayashi2011Sea p, 194] Only internal waters would increase when baselines do not ambulate (at least in a legal sense) any more. [@Soons2020Effects p. 375] Thus, the territory of a State would grow larger (as far as the baselines are), extending territorial sovereignty of States. This means that this increasing area would not be subject to the UNCLOS any more. ^[As internal waters are not addressed by the UNCLOS.] In consequence, this area becomes a restricted area for third States (as no passage rights apply within internal waters.). In the case of a complete submergence of an island or State this approach would lead to a strange situation: even in such a case baselines, national territory and the related zones will remain regardless the actual circumstances. Following this, the ocean would then at some parts be peppered with spaces related to the full sovereignty of an already disappeared (part of a) State. Essentially, this would mean that vessels cannot navigate through these areas.
However, the state in which the baselines are to be frozen is not answered uniformly. There seem to exist various possibilities to choose a 'critical datum', reaching from the entry into force of the UNCLOS over the latest charts referred to in Art. 5 UNCLOS to the point in which a State gives due publicity to their baselines in accordance with Art. 16 para 2 UNCLOS. [@Stephens2015Warming p. 793; @Hayashi2011Sea p. 197 sympathizes with the latter option.]

#### Maintaining outer limits of the EEZ and of the territorial sea

Soons proposes to maintain the outer limits of all maritime zones, including the territorial sea and the EEZ. [@Soons1990effects p. 223, p. 225] This approach is also supported by Freestone. [@Freestone1991International p. 113, p. 115] Only continental shelfs may be excluded as they are already fixed permanently when declared. ^[See section above.] The impacts of such an approach are obvious: the outer limits would be divorced from the baseline which keeps its ambulatory character. While the territorial sea would increase and would become larger than the 12 nm mentioned in Art. 3 UNCLOS, the breadth of the EEZ would stay equal compared to nowadays. [@Soons2020Effects p. 376] This implies, that the States rights which they enjoy in the territorial sea would spatially expand including all restrictions for third States within that zone (no freedom of navigation or overflight). ^[See for further remarks section 3.1.] Furthermore, the territory of a State which finds its termination at the baseline would - in contrast to the legal solution mentioned beforehand - not in-, but would rather decrease when the baseline ambulates landwards; present internal waters would become territorial sea. [@Soons1990effects p. 225; @Soons2020Effects p. 376]

#### Maintaining outer limits of the EEZ

Another option is to freeze the outer limits of the EEZ only. This would mean to make geographical coordinates of the EEZ at a certain point legally binding. Similar to the aforementioned approach, the baselines would stay ambulatory. In contrast, the territorial sea would ambulate following the baseline. Consequently, the territorial sea would not exceed 12 nm as stated in Art. 3 UNCLOS. What can be observed in this approach is an increasing breadth of the EEZ, counting more than the 200 nm stipulated by Art. 57 UNCLOS. This essentially means, that the sovereignty of a State (which can be exercised in the territorial sea) would not increase breadth-wise. Only the economic rights in the EEZ would increase. Accordingly, Soons concludes that this solution "(...) would involve the least intrusion on the current rules on baselines and other rules of the law of the sea."[@Soons2020Effects p. 376]

#### Maintaining outer limits of the territorial sea

This approach was also subject to the discussions of the International Law Association Committee on International Law and Sea Level Rise.^[See the proposal from Freestone: @Vidas2017Inter p. 3] Still, this approach was only slightly touched and was not discussed in the full scope. Neither does it appear in the final report on this matter of the ILA Committee [@Vidas2018Sydney; also not explicitly addressed by @Roach2018Sea p. 366]. Thus, it seems to be necessary to evaluate the impacts of such an approach. In this approach, baselines would ambulate and would still be the crucial point for determining the outer limits of the EEZ. The territorial sea would be, in contrast to the EEZ, decoupled from the baseline and would not be determined by distance any more. Accordingly, the gained waters (as a cause of baselines shifting landwards) would fall into the territorial sea, ultimately leading to an increase of the width of it. While the territorial sea would grow larger than their designated breadth of 12 nm according to Art. 3 UNCLOS, the breadth of the EEZ would shrink. Consequently, States would then lose influence further seawards. In the case of a shift of more than 200 nm landwards, the zone of the territorial sea would supercede the EEZ. In this case the part of the UNCLOS addressing the EEZ would become irrelevant as the territorial sea is governed by a separate part of the Convention. Thus, this would not be in the interest of States, as they essentially do not want to lose their influence further seawards of the current outer limits of the territorial sea.

## Evaluation

All the presented solutions above face in one or the other way different and various challenges and certain legal implications. First of all, it is worth noting that the drawers of the UNCLOS did not explicitly address the upcoming problem of climate change and the legal implications coming with it. [@Rayfuse2009Whither p. 5; @Freestone1991International p. 115; @Moritaka2013Islands p. 10] This said, it is not surprising that the UNCLOS itself is silent on that matter. [@Rayfuse2010International p. 3; @Hayashi2011Sea p. 194] By negative implication or rather an argument a contrario, it can be observed that the UNCLOS does not know any state of permanence neither for marine spaces nor for baselines (exceptions are the continental shelf and straight baselines) which would be important in order to prevent the lose of marine entitlements seawards. ^[See therefore also the discussion about the ambulatory character of baselines.] This clearly indicates that other marine boundaries than the boundary of the continental shelf and straight baselines are not meant to be of a durable state. ^[This is the only consistent following consequence of ambulatory baselines. See for further details and proof section about normal baselines.] Following this, it must be concluded that none of the 'freezing-solutions' presented above bases on a legal ground of the UNCLOS (which all rely on a fixing/freezing of current zones/boundaries) and only fragments of regulations of the UNCLOS can be interpreted or rather used to find a kind of - even if only partly - solution for this matter. [@Rayfuse2009Whither p. 5]

Nevertheless, as the UNCLOS is a peace-seeking treaty (see preamble of the UNCLOS) the presented solutions should be taken into consideration in order to maintain peace between the treaty parties. To maintain peace, it is also important to find a global consistent solution to avoid a hotchpotch of differing legal responses on this matter. This becomes all the more important for the first and most affected States by the sea level rise as these are in the need of a fast solution due to the pressing time frame. Thence, it is (rightly) felt that a 'Business as Usual'-protection - meaning the protection which is in line with the current Law of the Sea - of marine entitlements is not enough and also unfair, as the most affected States are usually not among the biggest contributors to climate change and sea level rise. ^[See for supportive evidence: @Moritaka2013Islands p. 10; @Powers2013Introducing pp. 139 f.; @Proelss2019Raum para 39.]

To start with, all solutions of freezing share certain similarities. They are all characterized in one or another way by providing a certain kind of legal as well as actual stability. Consequently, States would have not such a big incentive any more to protect the current baseline in artificial ways (at least speaking of the legal determination of their designated zones in accordance with the UNCLOS). Thus, the financial burden would be minimized. [@Vidas2018Sydney pp. 14 ff.] Additionally, it could be argued that all freezing methods except the freezing of the outer limits of the territorial sea would, speaking of the range of influence seawards, stay at the status quo and would safeguard the interest of States. Also, it would prevent marine zones of getting the character of the high seas. This is concomitant with a freezing of the high seas as well, because the furthest extend of States´ influence would be maintained and legally fixed. This means on the one hand, that the community´s interest would be limited in light of a potential gain of the high seas; on the other hand, the community would not lose any existing high seas through the (artificial) increase of land mass. ^[See therefore the comment from Rayfuse @Vidas2017Inter p. 5.] Also, an increase of the high seas has not always been beneficial for the area of the high seas in the history.  [@Powers2013Introducing p. 133]

However, the aforementioned similarities should not distract from the immense differences speaking of the maintaining of the outer limits of certain zones and therefore a State´s influence. This is especially true for the fate of the waters further landwards. The highest increase of full and exclusive territorial sovereignty can be observed when freezing the baseline. The increase is closely linked to the baseline. All waters landwards of the baseline fall into the territory of the coastal State. Thus, all the lost territory in the cause of the sea level rise would stay under full and exclusive sovereignty of a State. This essentially means, that there is in example no innocent passage in a huge area. Also, in the case of a complete submergence of a State there would be marine areas, namely the internal waters of the former land territory, where no passage rights for foreign vessels would apply.

Maintaining the outer limits of the territorial sea and the EEZ would consequently lead to an increase of (limited) territorial sovereignty in the territorial sea because the territorial sea would still depend on the baseline which ambulates. Due to this, foreign vessels would have the right of innocent passage. Also, the aforementioned situation of a submergence of a State causing restricted areas, would not exist.

Freezing the outer limits of the territorial sea would lead to an even bigger increase of the territorial sea (speaking breadth-wise) and therefore also to an increase of the limited territorial sovereignty. At the same time, the outer limits of the EEZ would still depend on the baseline which would lead to a strange situation, when the outer limits of the EEZ will fall into the area of the increased territorial sea. In that case, the interests of States to keep their influence seawards will be minimized as they would finally only have influence with the range of the current outer limits of the territorial sea. Additionally, it seems to be problematic that Part V UNCLOS dedicated to the EEZ would lose its scope entirely because the rights of the coastal State within the territorial sea are even more comprehensive (speaking of sovereignty). Thus, the maintenance of the outer limits of the territorial sea cannot be deemed as appropriate to solve the problem.

The least increase of territorial sovereign rights and the least limitation of rights of other States can be seen when maintaining the outer limits of the EEZ only. As the zones stipulating the sovereign rights to the coastal State will move landwards with the ambulatory baseline, the part of the economic exclusive rights of the coastal State will increase. With this approach States would not lose their economic valuable rights seawards and the States territorial rights would not increase. A complete submergence of a State would therefore leave only an economic zone behind which limits the rights of other States the least. Thus, it can be concluded that the freezing of the outer limits of the EEZ only would lead to a balance between the economic interest and the limitation of the increase of territorial sovereignty.

Another huge difference between all approaches is the fate of the baseline. While the maintenance of the baseline means that these will not shift - speaking legally - any more, the other approaches would follow the view of the ambulatory character of baselines. In these approaches, baselines would follow the actual low-water line. Thence, for the view to freeze the baseline the line of both Courts and the ILA must be given up. Also, sometimes the argument is raised that the freezing of baselines would take workload of the shoulder of the States because they do not have to update their charts any more. [@Vidas2018Sydney p. 14] Nonetheless, this argument is actually unsubstantiated: in order to fulfill their designated purpose, charts need to be updated regularly to safeguard the navigation. [@Vidas2018Sydney p. 14; @Soons2020Effects p. 375]

Detached from the aforementioned discussion of the (dis-) advantages of each approach, all of them could be seen as contradicting the principle 'land dominates the sea'. However, this argument can be (at least a bit) invalidated for the approach of only freezing the outer limits of the EEZ through the following consideration:
As a principle it is recognized that the land should dominate the sea, basically saying that there cannot be any certain claims over marine spaces where there is no land associated to it. [@1969North para 96; @2009Maritime para 77; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 230] However, although details of this principle are surely under legal debate ^[See in example the considerations of the ILA: @Vidas2018Sydney p. 16], there do already exist breaches of this principle which have their base in regulations of the UNCLOS. [@Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 274] An example could be the permanent state of continental shelfs ones declared even if this State does not meet the geological conditions set out in Art. 76 para 1 and 4 UNCLOS. Even though there is no land mass which dominates the sea division in this regard, the permanent state of those shelfs seems to be (widely) accepted. ^[For further proof, see section about maintaining the continental shelf.]
Against this background, the relationship of the EEZ and the continental shelf must be examined closer. According to Art. 56 para 1 lit. a UNCLOS, the coastal States´ sovereign rights extend besides the waters superjacent to the seabed also on the _seabed and subsoil_. However, Art. 56 para 3 UNCLOS stipulates that "*the rights set out with respect to the seabed and subsoil shall be exercised in accordance with Part VI.*" Part VI is designated to regulate the continental shelf. Thus, it can be noted that the EEZ - through the integration of Part VI of the UNCLOS by Art. 56 para 3 of the Convention - already knows a kind of permanent state speaking of the seabed and the subsoil. From the authors point of view, this could mean that a certain permanence of the EEZ is already anchored in the UNCLOS. Although this does not mean that this may be the legal ground for the freezing of the whole EEZ, it can be argued that the maintenance of the outer limits of the EEZ would fit in the context of the UNCLOS. As there is no similar consideration regarding the other outer limits of the maritime zones, the freezing of the outer limits of the EEZ only would not violate the principle of land dominates the sea as much as the other proposals would do.

Another problem would arise even when agreeing on the freezing of the outer limits of the EEZ. It stays unclear what motivation drives a State in order to freeze current limits. This can - in the obvious case - be the danger of sea level rise. Others may only act out of selfish, economic reasons and therefore kind of abuse that possibility. If a legal solution should only include States that are actually concerned by sea level rise, a possibility would be to establish another international institution, similarly to the institutions already provided by the UNCLOS (Seabed Authority, Continental Shelf Authority). Such an institution could decide and evaluate if a State may or may not freeze current limits. However, such a division between affected and not-affected States might be unfair and inappropriate while finding a global solution to a global problem. At the same time, it would not make any difference to distinguish between these groups because when a State is not affected by sea level rise and is freezing its limits there will be no difference between the frozen and the actual outer limits of the EEZ. Also, such a procedure could endanger the goal in reaching a solution, as these neglected States could object to these rules.

At first glance, an approval of all methods of freezing would at least be conceivable. On the one hand the extend of a marine entitlements in direction of the sea would be in most cases (freezing baselines, freezing of outer limits of the EEZ, freezing of the outer limits of the EEZ and outer limits of the territorial sea) equal. However, the fate of waters further landwards would differ. In light of the spatial division, this is concomitant with different applicable legal regimes associated with each zone. Essentially, this would lead to a hotchpotch of differing marine zones - speaking of the spatial extend of these - from State to State. This would be somewhat confusing and impractical, already imaginable for vessels which navigate through zones of different States. Thence, such an approach should be rejected.

To conclude, out of the proposed freezing methods, the approach of maintaining only the outer limits of the EEZ seems to be the most conceivable option. Firstly, it would only decouple the baseline-dependency of one maritime boundary. At the same time, States would not lose their economic interests seawards while there is no increase of sovereign rights or even territorial sovereignty speaking breadth-wise. Finally, it would also be consistent with the ambulatory character of baselines and speaking practically, would only lead to a development of a new legal tool (for further discussion see following section) for one maritime zone. Additionally, the freezing of the outer limits of the EEZ seems to be already anchored in the UNCLOS through the permanent state of the continental shelf regime. The possible legal incorporation of such will be discussed in the following.

## Possible Legal Incorporation

After identifying possible solutions to adopt baselines to sea level rise, it is necessary to examine how these solutions can potentially come into force in light of a legal incorporation. This is especially important because none of the presented solutions find a legal base in the UNCLOS.

The UNCLOS itself is open for new developments, thus opening the door for the incorporation of amendments according to Art. 312 - Art. 316 UNCLOS. ^[As has been thought off by many; see in example: @Soons2020Effects p. 374] Thence, an agreement on an amendment suggests itself. Those amendments are legally binding for treaty parties and even for States that have not been part of the UNCLOS at the time of the agreement on the amendment according to Art. 316 para 4 and para 6 UNCLOS. Art. 312 UNCLOS stipulates the opportunity that "*(a)fter the expiry of a period of 10 years from the date of entry into force of this convention, a State Party may (...) propose specific amendments to this Convention (...)*". As the UNCLOS is in most countries in force for more than 10 years, it is possible for States to follow the procedure laid out in Art. 312 UNCLOS and propose such an amendment. ^[Also considered by @Moritaka2013Islands p. 12]

Although given the possibility of agreeing on amendments according to Art. 312 ff. UNCLOS, it is most likely that States will not use this possibility and rather enhance the UNCLOS by other international mechanisms, for instance by soft law (international customary law) or by new separate treaties.[@Moritaka2013Islands p. 13; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 289; @Vrancken2017Article Art. 312 UNCLOS para 1; @Busch2018Sea p. 180; @Blitza2019Auswirkungen p. 233]

International Customary Law consists of two elements; a common **state practice** and a so called **opinio juris**.[@1985Judgment p. 20 para 27 stating "*(...) that the material of customary international law is to be looked for primarily in the actual state practice and opinio juris of States (...)*"; see additionally @2018Report p. 119 conclusion 2; @Treves2006Customary paras 8 ff.; @Stein2017Voelkerrecht para 124; @Tanaka2019International pp. 12 f.; @Krajewski2020Voelkerrecht § 4 para 128] In order to establish new international customary law there is a need of both these elements. First of all, there needs to be a common state practice to solve the problem in a way presented above. A state practice must be uniform, sufficiently general and of a certain durability. [@Stein2017Voelkerrecht para 128; @Krajewski2020Voelkerrecht § 4 para 129]

At the time of writing there is not a common practice of States of any of these solutions yet. However, it is worth noting that the Taputapuãtea Declaration on Climate Change at Papeete (signed by seven leaders of Polynesian States and Territories in 2015) addressing this issue. [@Group2015Polynesian] Verbatim it says in there that all State parties to the UNFCCC should acknowledge the "*permanently establish(ment) (of) __the baselines__* (emphasis added) *in accordance with the UNCLOS, without taking into account sea level rise.*" ^[See Section of @Group2015Polynesian no. 4; With regards to the loss of territorial integrity.] This outcome (the permanently fix of baselines) was also reassured by the Summit of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement in 2018. ^[@2018Delap; See in the Agreement, point 8] In 2016 the Republic of the Marshall Islands declared by the Marshall Islands Maritime Zones Declaration Act 2016 to "*repeal(...) the Marine Zones Act of 1984, and replace with the Maritime Zones Declaration Act (...)*". ^[See preamble of @2016Marshall] Following this, the Republic of the Marshall Islands publicized another Baselines & Maritime Zones Outer Limits Declaration in 2016. This includes a detailed depiction of geographic coordinates determining baselines and outer limits of maritime zones of the Marshall Islands in over 450 pages. Freestone and Schofield have thus concluded, that the "*Marshall Islands legislation (...) appears to anticipate that, once established, these 'lines in the sea' defining baselines, limits and boundaries will not move in the future.*" [@Freestone2016Current p.733; see also on this matter: @Vidas2018Sydney p. 17] Similar to this procedure, Kiribati ^[See the legislation under @2014Kiribati] and Tuvalu ^[See 2012 Legislation @2012Tuvalu and 2015 legislation @2015Tuvalu] have passed legislation. However, the United States have declared an objection against the approach of the Marshall Islands. [@Vidas2017Inter p. 6; this issue also raised by @Freestone2016Current pp. 739 f.] This objection finds its reason in the claim of marine entitlements designated to the Wake Island which is in the view of the United States not under the sovereignty of the Marshall Islands, but rather territory of the United States ^[See section about Marshall Islands @CentralIntelligenceAgency2021World; see also @CentralIntelligenceAgency2021Worlda] and cannot be used to establish marine entitlements.

Even though these examples can serve as a base for developing new international customary law, it is far away from meeting the requirements of state practice ^[Essentially lacking of a certain durability and a sufficiently general character.], not even speaking of the opinio juris.
Detached from the question of the establishment of customary law _in concreto_, such an establishment seems to have a huge disadvantage regarding the pressing relevance of the matter. The development of a common state practice and an opinio juris is formed over time and thus consequently takes time ^[See in example: @Stein2017Voelkerrecht para 128; even though there does not exist a strict time limit until a certain practice can be regarded as international customary law; although a so called "instant customary law" is in some points of view in exceptional cases also possible, see therefore @Treves2006Customary para 24. In the point of view of the authors of this chapter such an instant customary law must be handled restrictively and can not be considered as a solution in this matter.]. Thus, new international customary law seems to be too slow and too impractical as the legal binding of the customary law would potentially come too late to meet the interests and needs of the States which are concerned by sea level rise. ^[See therefore @Rayfuse2010International p. 7; @Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 285; @Stephens2015Warming p. 793; concerns also raised already by @Soons1990effects p. 226]

Hence, it seems appropriate that States agree on a new separate treaty on this matter on a global level. [@Moritaka2013Islands p. 10] As sea level rise a global phenomenon the question of the competent institution may arise. It seems feasible to reach an agreement between the States of the UNCLOS, i.e. an Implementation Agreement like the 1994 Agreement.[@Stephens2015Warming p. 793] However, keeping the global character in mind, it would be desirable to include also other States in the process of these agreements as they are affected by the sea level rise as well. Thus, the institution of the United Nations ^[@Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 287 identifies the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (UNICPOLOS) as the appropriate one.] may be the appropriate institution to come up with a new treaty regarding this problem as to make one solution legally binding. ^[See therefore @Moritaka2013Islands p. 13; @Rayfuse2010International p. 7] However, even such an approach would face various challenges, first and foremost and most importantly an agreement of all participating States is not secured for various reasons.^[doubts raised by @Stoutenberg2011Implementing pp. 301 ff., pointing at distant-water fishing nations like the US, Russia, Japan, Korea or France and landlocked States as potential objectors.]

Besides a globally binding treaty and solution it is also possible to reach agreements between two States determining their baselines. ^[For the process of negotiating boundaries see: @Anderson2008Moderna] Such an agreement would also "survive" the landward shift of the current baselines. Such a procedure can be observed where there are overlapping zones of two States that lie opposite from each other (Art. 15 UNCLOS). Nevertheless, this is just a bilateral or even multilateral (in cases involving three or more States) solution, which does not include every State that is affected by sea level rise. Additionally, it seems to be only a spatial solution as such a treaty can only be applied when States lie opposite or adjacent to each other.[@Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 281]

Furthermore, it seems possible that a State could claim historic rights over historic waters. Nonetheless, such a legal friction becomes only legally binding when there are no objections by other States. Given the possible extension of rights of other States as the formerly claimed areas become international waters, it is unlikely that no State will object against such a historical solution.[@Stoutenberg2011Implementing p. 283] Additionally, Soons points out that the doctrine of historic waters might be inapplicable in the regard of sea level rise as this is a global problem affecting all States whereas historic claims are of an exceptional nature. ^[For further reading and other reasons given by Soons, see @Soons1990effects pp. 224 f.; see also @Soons2020Effects p. 373.] In other words, such a legal incorporation does not seem to take place in this matter.

To sum up, there are a few ways to decide on an appropriate solution regarding the shifting of baselines making it legally binding. However, it seems unlikely that States will agree on a new amendment to the UNCLOS as well as the establishment of international customary law seems to be impractical in this matter. Thus, it is desirable to reach a global treaty including all States to solve this matter.

## Conclusional Remarks

Climate change and the rise of the sea level are urgent issues, endangering coastlines around the world. Although predictions of the IPCC differ due to the scenario taken as a basis, it is clear that the sea level rise has a significant impact until the end of the century making it a pressing topic due to the relatively close time frame. Among the territory of the State the baselines, which serve as a base for the delimitation of most maritime zones, will be affected by the sea level rise. A crucial and decisive measure setting the way ahead is the question of the ambulatory character of baselines. Under the assumption that baselines are not - in a legal sense - ambulatory, they will not change compared to baselines shown on the charts at some point. Thus, making the legal responses in this regard obsolete. In contrast, provided the (preferable) ambulatory character of baselines, they will essentially shift landwards as they are the actual low-water line. Such a shifting is concomitant among other disadvantages with a loss of territory and further seawards with a loss of certain rights. Thus, the interest of many States is to keep (at least) the current state of influence in accordance with the UNCLOS.

Against this background, this matter has been subject of legal discussion, especially in the last two decades as this matter has become more and more apparent and pressing. Thence, possible solutions for this matter have been raised. In view of the legal regulations of the UNCLOS, it must be emphasized that there indeed do exist certain methods or rather mechanisms in order to face the challenge of sea level rise, namely the maintaining of the current baselines, the greater usage of straight baselines or the declaration of the continental shelf. However, these often do not fulfill the interests of States in toto. Thence, methods of freezing of maritime boundaries and the baselines have been proposed. It is worth noting that none of these freezing-solutions does have a fundamental character in the wording of the UNCLOS.

Nonetheless, it seems reasonable to find a solution as the most affected States are usually not among the biggest contributors to climate change. Out of the solutions presented above, the maintaining or rather the freezing of the outer limits of the EEZ would be a reasonable solution as it still provides the States concerned with rights in their former areas while not extending their territorial sovereignty in the internal waters in the direction of the sea. Moreover, the relationship of the continental shelf regime and the EEZ regime indicates that the EEZ does know a state of permanence, namely the outer limits of the seabed and subsoil. Thus, fixing the outer limits of the EEZ finds an anchor in the provision already. In light of this, it can also be argued that the maintenance of the outer limits of the EEZ contradicts the principle of "Land dominates the Sea" the least as this breach is already constituted by the integration of the continental shelf regime in the EEZ regime. Additionally, this would be compatible with the preferable ambulatory character of baselines. Thence, this solution stays closer to the current legal framework than the other proposals do.

Still, it must be stressed that there is indeed a need of legal incorporation of such a solution. There exist a few ways to achieve this. However, it seems unlikely that States make use of amendments to the Convention nor can they rely on historic rights in this matter. Although a certain fragmented State practice can be identified in this matter, this cannot be regarded as international customary law yet. Therefore, the authors highly suggest a separate treaty which would be negotiated by States concerned. This would lead to a (hopefully) fair, legally binding and most importantly global solution which is highly desirable in this matter.

## References
