---
title: Is SAR keeping up? A study of SAR treaties and their evolution
linktitle: Manthei | Is SAR keeping up? A study of SAR treaties and their evolution
type: book
date: '2019-05-05T00:00:00+01:00'

# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 1
---

**by Ivo Manthei**

## Why you should know more about Search and Rescue

The surface of the oceans is about 361.100.000 km². It may happen to you in the south pacific, that a Boat is not less than 2000 km away from the nearest land. Having an accident there is rather disastrous. While the reasons may vary (e.g. broken Rudder or mast, a crack in the Sail or even in the hull) the consequences are often severe. “Normal” accidents are unfortunate. Having a tire burst on the highway is troublesome. But with help arriving in over 20 hours, the situation may seem forlorn. En plus come the circumstances, such as weather and swell. Even in the 21st century,  where High-tech radar systems exist and Swell and drift simulations calculate the position of men over board search and rescue missions can be a real challenge.

When the sinking of the titanic happened in 1912 there were no radio operators working nonstop for the Captain. Operating the radio was a day job. Therefore, when other ships warned the Titanic´s Crew of an iceberg ahead of them the messages did not get trough.  When the Iceberg was eventually spotted there was no protocol for how situations as such should be handled. The radio operators did not know about the newest alarm code standards. The evacuation took place without prior training. The few existing lifeboats were not capable to transport everyone from the Vessel.
Much has changed since 1912. In present time every coastal state is obliged to establish a Rescue Coordination Centre which is often connected to joint Rescue Coordination Centres. For a broader context, the Global maritime Distress and Safety system was established, including various systems for better SAR-missions and connection all around the world. Also there are more technological advanced methods to prevent fatalities at sea and in the worst case to get help to the people in need, e.g. unified radio control codes and systems.

This paper will take four chapters to present and analyse the present SAR-overall concept defined mainly by various treaties on international law, before coming to a conclusion on the featured topics.

The first chapter will briefly introduce the applicability of SAR. Before a ship (or a human being) can be object to a rescue mission there has to be a situation which reasons the need for help. This is called being in distress. Defining this is very important for further questions of liability and rights of the saved person. Furthermore, it is important to know the definition of distress for the following treaties because each one is only applicable in case of a distressed ship or person.

Following the clarifications on the wordings, this paper will present the most important treaties and their history in the second chapter. It will focus on the reforms each treaty entailed and give an overview of the results. Doing so, the paper will present the usual SAR procedure in a brief textual simulation of a mission.

After the informational part, the paper will, in the fourth chapter, dive deeper into the topic. The goal is to filter gaps in the set of rules which lead to controversies regarding SAR which are important today. The paper will focus on the situation the saved people face after being saved. Because although this might not occur on the first thought, it is by no means clear what the next steps in bringing the rescued people to a definitive destination are.
When saved, the rescued people are in a very ambiguous on board of the rescuing ship. It is by no means clear that they will be just brought to the next port. Interests of many parties play into the proceeding of the situation. For example, if the closest coastal state does not want the rescued people to be led onto their territory. This is especially important when it comes to refugees. Different scholars have therefore tried to interpret a right to disembarkation from the SAR framework and/or other laws.

The paper will then end with a summary, again highlighting the most important changes since the sinking of the Titanic and trying to formulate an expectation on how SAR should - or is presumably going to - evolve the next couple of years in relation to the addressed problems.
The overall goal is to shed light upon the merely lightly touched topic of SAR, what the relevant rules and systems are, what problems have been solved, which problems remain and how as well as if they can be solved.

## Applicability of SAR-missions

SAR missions serve to save people in distress. The definition of distress is equivocal.
In the *Eleanor* case from 1809, Lord Stowell specified three requirements for identifying a distress situation. This was one of the first known attempts to define a distress situation.[@Tanaka2019international p.99.]  
First, "*it must be an urgent distress* (...), *something of grave necessity*"".   Second, there does not have to be an "*actual physical necessity existing at the moment* (...) *but there must be at least a moral necessity*". So, a damaged ship which voyage would be dangerous for the lives of the persons on board would be enough.  
Thirdly, "*it must not be a distress which he has created himself*. ^[@Tanaka2019international p.99 with the same result but who understands the burden of proof as a fourth requirement; @Stowell1809Eleanor p.1068.]  
The 1979 International Convention on maritime Search and Rescue (SAR) takes a more grave approach and defines a situation of distress in Chapter 1.3.13 SAR1979 as amended as "*A Situation wherein there is reasonable certainty that a person, a vessel or other craft is threatened by grave and imminent danger and requires immediate assistance*". [@SAR1979 as amended.]  
From a grammatical understanding "distress" means "*a state of danger or desperate need*" ^[@MerriamW; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p.165.]  
It is worth noting that the grammatical definition does not specify for what the danger must be immanent. This is striking against the background that in legal scholars there is almost overall consensus, that situations where there is danger only for the cargo of the ship are excluded from the definition of distress. [@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p.166; @Tanaka2019international p.100; @Churchill1999law p. 63; different in evaluation @GadowStephani2006Der S. 417f; only @Bank2011Introduction p. 822 with a completely different view.] However, this discrepancy can be ascribed to the differences of legal and grammatical definitions.
Danger to economic values not being enough to determine a situation of distress was furthermore acknowledged by the International Law Commission (ILC) which stated that
*threats to human live are at the heart of the concept of distress*. [@Tanaka2019international p.100; @Churchill1999law p. 176.]  
This was echoed by the Irish High Court in the *M/V Toledo* case from 1995. [@Toledo pp. 406.] Here, the court took two separate steps: first it distinguished between a situation where there is peril to the life of the persons on board, and a situation where the imminent danger only concerns economic interests. In a second step the court ruled that:  
*if safety of life is not a factor, then* (...) the states can *have proper regard to their own interests* (...).  
Meaning that in such cases the regulations from the treaties do not apply because the ship is not "in distress".

A more controversial question is if danger to the life of a person onboard is a compelling necessity or if it is sufficient to the definition of distress if a person is in danger of severe health impairment. ^[@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 165; @Churchill1999law S. 63; @GadowStephani2006Der S. 225,267 f.; @GoodwinGill2011Right S. 274; @Tanaka2019international S. 81 f.; @Commission2008Responsibility Art. 24 commentary Rn. 6; @Bank2011Introduction S. 821; @Barnes2004Refugee S. 60.] This is not explicitly regulated in any treaty. Although this paper will not go into detail with this question, ^[for an extensive assembly of Definitions see @GadowStephani2006Der pp. 213.] it is worth keeping in mind that the definition from the SAR requires a high risk situation. The reason to this is, that the level of protection of vessels and persons in distress is so high, the vessels sometimes may intervene with the territorial sovereignty of the coastal state having to grant the right to enter a port to a distressed vessel.[@Churchill1999law p. 63; @Roesoeg2002Refugees S. 57; @Barnes2004Refugee S. 58; @GadowStephani2006Der S. 327; @ProelssRescue (Fn. 18), S. 21; @Tanaka2019international p.100; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 165] This is why definitions by other courts also are quite strict when it comes to the required level of risk for the vessel and its crew.^[@Arechaga1990Decision; @Commission2008Responsibility Art. 23 commentary to Rn. 6; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p.165.]

Unequivocal examples to persons or vessels in distress are for example persons which went overboard in freezing temperatures or ships which are leaking in the south pacific ocean.

If a person or a vessel is in a situation consistent with definition of distress and no exception from the applicability is immanent, the set of rules from the different SAR-treaties apply.

There are two noteworthy exemptions: the first being danger for the vessel, crew or passengers who arrive to the rescue. [@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 166.] This is reflected by various international treaties, ^[@NationsConvention Art. 12; @1910salvageConvention Art. 10; especially Art. 98 I @UNCLOS Art. 98 I.] Therefore, if rushing to help another vessel puts the rescuing vessel in dangerous situations, there is no obligation to act accordingly.
The second exemptions is the rule of reasonableness which is also regulated in Art. 98 I lit. b UNCLOS.^[@UNCLOS Art. 98 I lit. b.] In a case where the success of the rescue mission is in serious doubt, e.g. in the middle of a storm, or because a search has been ongoing for so much time; that the success of the mission is unlikely and staying in the region could endanger the searching vessel, the captain has a discretionary decision (decision *ex aequo et bono*) to make, to proceed with the mission or to call the mission forfeited. [@Grandy1989Volume Fn. 98.11(c); @Bank2011Introduction S. 825; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 167.]

## Most important treaties

The most important treaties for the evolution of SAR are going to be presented in the following. The International Convention on Safety of Life at Sea from 1914 (SOLAS 1914) was the first convention to comprehensively treat the most important issues for SAR. The SOLAS 1974 can be called the next most important treaty because it modernized important security measures for SAR. Although the SOLAS got new important content with the 1929,1948 and 1960 additions, the SOLAS 1974 was a fully revised one. It is the most important preparatory measure for SAR.
For SAR missions, the SAR 1979 can be named as the most important treaty. It contains a very comprehensive set of rules and recommendations to make SAR missions around the globe as effective as possible. This is why this treaty and its amendments from 1998 and 2004 will be examined extensively.

### SOLAS 1914

Only two years after the sinking of the Titanic in 1912 some of the then biggest naval forces corporately passed a treaty to reform the safety of merchant shipping at sea. The member states refer to this cause in the preambula of the International Convention on Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS 1914) as following:  
*Having recognised the desirability of determining* (...) *certain uniform rules with respect to the safety of life at sea,* (the states) *have decided to conclude a convention* (...).^[@SOLAS1914 preambular.]

This part will give an overview of the chapters and of the most important innovations.  

The convention is divided in two parts. First a provisional part, subdivided into eight chapters. The second part is a part which specifies the set of rules from the first part.

The first and the second chapters were devoted to provisions on how to give effect to the treaty and to which vessels the convention is applicable. The third chapter seems to be a direct response to the Titanic's collision with an iceberg. By Art. 6 I SOLAS 1914 the contracting parties established an ice patrol to *ensure the destruction of derelicts in the north Atlantic Ocean*. Furthermore, the ice patrol was made responsible for study and observation of the ice conditions in the North Atlantic ocean. The United States were invited to provide two vessels to ensure the fulfilment of the tasks. The costs were divided by the member states named in Art. 7. In addition to this, the steamship companies, which picked the routes to cross the Atlantic, were obliged to give public notice of their routes and the changes to them. These were directly actionable measures to ensure the safety of the transatlantic route which the Titanic took in 1912.

Art. 8 and 9 SOLAS 1914 introduce reporting requirements. By these, the masters of the vessels are obliged to communicate all information they have about dangerous derelicts  to the vessels in vicinity and likewise to the competent authorities. These provisions promoted the coordination of the state community for the purpose of safety at sea.
Especially noteworthy is the requirement for all administrations to bring the received information to everyone concerned and to the other administrations. And that the information is to be sent in a uniform matter. ^[@SOLAS1914 Annex Art. I.]
Art. 10 SOLAS 1914 provides a regulation for the informed vessels to alter their course and to proceed with moderate speed. Albeit the impreciseness of the term *moderate speed* it can be deduced, that informed vessels shall reduce their velocity to proceed with caution. To the Background, that back then, ships where almost always going full speed through the north Atlantic to make the crossing as fast as possible.
Art. 11 and 12 SOLAS 1914 are another step to uniform international law by inaugurating provisions to have satisfactory morse - signaling - equipment on board and to use them only for the purposes provided in the annex.  
Chapter four contains provisions for the construction of vessels. These were one of the paramount provisions to standardize safety of merchant ships for all the signing parties and later for every vessel built in the world.  
The fifth chapter is dedicated to radiotelegraphy. By Art. 31 SOLAS 1914, all vessels, to which the regulation applies, shall be equipped with radiotelegraphy installations. This norm is complimented by provisions regulating the use and the obligations that come from having such an installation. In 1914 it was not certain that every vessel was equipped with all the technological equipment necessary for a safe voyage. The reason behind this was a lack of national, and especially international, obligation as well as little motivation of the Shipowners themselves.
Art. 34 SOLAS 1914 obliges the ship´s crew to maintain a continuous watch over the installation. This obligation arrives either by the Flag State through domestic law [@SOLAS1914 Art. 34 I.] or for certain vessels directly from the Convention itself. [@SOLAS1914 Art. 34 II.]
In addition to this, every master of a *ship, who receives a call for assistance from a vessel in distress is bound to proceed to the assistance of the persons in distress.* by Art. 37 I SOLAS 1914. This provision can be understood as one of the first provisions including the duty to assist distressed vessels.  
Chapter six provides regulations regarding life-saving appliances. Every Vessel from thereon was obliged to carry only as many persons on aboard as there were lifeboats (Art. 40 SOLAS 1914). This applies not only to newly constructed boats, but also for existing ships.  
The seventh chapter provides rules for safety certifications of Vessels, while the eighth holds final provisions.

The SOLAS 1914 convention primarily provided the technical changes which were considered necessary then. By setting rules for the use of the technical equipment the Convention worked towards the desired unification of international law of life at Sea. Collisions with icebergs where tried to be avoided in the first place by introducing the ice patrol and the information exchange between the vessels. ^[For a brief insight of how the Convention was received see the Analysis of the SOLAS 1914 by then President of the Seamen's Union @Furuseth1914Analysis.]

### SOLAS 1974

Apart from an innovative way of amendment - implementation, the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea 1974 (SOLAS 1974) came with modernizations of the regulations from 1914. Together with the implementation of safe waterways and provisions for the use and equipment of modernized radiotelegraphy.
This part of the paper is going to highlight the most essential changes i.e. new constructs.  

The SOLAS 1974 was adopted in 1974 and entered into force in 1980. The Convention consists of 13 articles and an annex divided into 14 chapters. Especially, because of the technical advances in the 20th Century, there was room for regulations regarding new technology. Making the SOLAS 1974 significantly longer than SOLAS 1914.

To keep up with modernizations of technical equipment the convention had to be as dynamic as possible. Therefore, Art. 8 SOLAS 1974 provided a way of "automatically" adapting specific parts. ^[*An amendment to the Annex other than Chapter I*.] Art. 8 lit b vi 2 aa and bb SOLAS 1974 presume, that submitted amendments are accepted after  
1. two years from the time on it is communicated for acceptance ^[*shall be deemed to have been accepted* (aa) *at the end of two years from the date on which it is communicated to Contracting Governments for acceptance*.] or  
2. at the end of a different period if so decided by a specified majority of the contracting states ^[*shall be deemed to have been accepted at the end of a different period, (...) if so determined at the time of its adoption by a two-thirds majority of the contracting Governments present*.].  
The only way of hindering the presumption from entering into force is the objection to it from a specified majority of contracting states or a large proportion of naval power. ^[*(...) if within the specified period either more than one-third of Contracting Governments, or Contracting Governments the combined merchant fleets of which constitute not less than fifty per cent of the gross tonnage of the world's merchant fleet, notify the Secretary-General of the Organization that they object to the amendment, it shall be deemed not to have been accepted*.] This provision was really important for the development of the convention as the objecting governments had to take action to stop an amendment, not as usual, the other way round. This has led to many amendments since then. The convention is therefore often regarded to as the SOLAS 1974 "as amended".

The second chapter provides general provisions, including regulations for issuing safety certificates. ^[Chapter I Regulations 12 ff. @SOLAS1974.] Underlining the states interests of multilateralism in the case of safety at sea, regulation 19 SOLAS 1974 is especially worth mentioning, as it stipulates a right for every contracting government to control every ship (of other contracting Governments) in their ports towards the verification of such a certificate is on board. If it is not, the port State can  to take the necessary measures *to ensure that the ship shall not sail until it can proceed to sea without danger to the passengers or the crew*. The freedom of handling the situation and even intervening with the vessels journey is not limited by the convention. The officer carrying out the control is only obliged to inform the consul of the Flag State of the vessel about the taken measures and why such were deemed necessary. This provision amends the authority of the port State by taking over duties from the flag State which is regularly [@UNCLOS Art. 92 I.] the only one competent to do so. This is outstanding because it stipulates an extra competency to the port State deriving from international law additionally to the territorial rights.

#### Direct connections to SAR 1979

The next regulations are almost entirely connected to the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue 1979 (SAR 1979) therefore they are going to be addressed simultaneously.  
Chapter four for example contributes regulations regarding technical developments for radiotelegraphy and radiotelephony. The paramount reform is the implementation of the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS) which is further shaped by the SAR 1979. As stated by Regulation 10 lit. h iv 1 SOLAS 1974 there needs to be transmitters installed on the vessels which are activated automatically as well as radar direction finders. This is regulated by regulation 12 of chapter IV and regulation 12 of chapter V.  ^[Regulation 12 of Chapter V coordinates the specified requirement of the installations on board.]
In particular, part of the GMDSS is Satellite Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacons (EPIRBs) and Search and Rescue transponders (SARTs). These devices are activated manually or automatically and shall withstand severe conditions by Regulation 11 lit. a viii SOLAS 1974. These apparatuses shall be carried by the vessel and the lifeboats.
The GMDSS takes a two-step approach. One device is responsible for indicating a distress signal to everyone in the reach by sending a radio signal. ^[This is the EPIRB; Note, that there are also EPIRBS sending the Position of the Person in distress, there is not only one Definition of device prescribed by the SOLAS 1974.] The other device is made to send the location of the person. ^[This is the SART; Note, that nowadays there are various ways for these applications to work. i.e. with Radar, GPS or VHF-Radiotelephony] These installations are substantiated by various Satellites which were introduced in the 1970s and since then have been modernized.  
The fifth chapter contributes regulations to safety of navigation. Therein some prime examples are particularly noteworthy. Regulation 8 SOLAS 1974 provides the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the party Governments with the right to establish safe routes for traffic avoidance and passage. Back in the SOLAS 1914 this right belonged to the merchant companies.   
One provision, which has been taken directly from the SOLAS 1914 is the Ice Patrol Service, regulated in regulation 5 SOLAS 1974. The USA continues to manage the service and the member States agree on a Cost sharing mechanism by Regulation 6 SOLAS 1974.  

Another close link to the SAR 1979 can be found in regulation 10. This provision states the obligation of every master of a ship to proceed with all speed to the assistance of the persons in distress upon receiving a distress signal. This is a regulation directed straight to the master of the vessel. This is of crowning importance for the question of subjectivity in international law as it seems, that the master of the vessel is individually obligated to act. ^[for a deeper examination of the subjectivity of individuals under international law see @GadowStephani2006Der pp. 26; @Ipsen2018Voelkerrecht pp. 370.] Typically, the addressees of international law are the States themselves. The masters of the vessels are obliged in two ways. The first being the way just described, the other way is by national law of its flag State because the flag State is obliged to implement the rules of international law for their Vessels to their national law. ^[@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 163; @IMOGuidelines chapter 2.1.10; and @UNCLOS Art. 98(1).]

A further regulation which contributes noticeably to the SAR 1979 is regulation 15 SOLAS 1974 which provides the groundwork for governmental SAR organizations and maritime safety facilities. Thereby, each Government *undertakes arrangements* to ensure that persons in distress around their coast are rescued. The propound measures *should* include the establishment and operation of maritime safety arrangements *should* be adequate to locate and rescue persons in distress. One could argue these preparatory provisions are only applicable to the adjacent waters of the coastal state, thereby meaning the maritime zones under sovereign jurisdiction. To the background of an historical point of view this is not too controversial. As it will be seen, the SAR 1979 extends the state duty of operating SAR services to all parts of the Seas to organize and unify state efforts. The reason being different possibilities and endaevours of different countries around the world.

Chapter VI to XIV provide other safety measures e.g. for specific vessels and their cargo such as nuclear ships or Bulk Carriers. These measures are an outcome of the technological advance, that was made during the 20th century.

The SOLAS 1974 advanced the safety of merchant Vessels to prevent accidents in the first place. If a ship is not following the regulations from this convention, all of the concerned member states can take drastic measures for ensuring, that the Vessel sails safely. Following the technological advance, there are additional technical measures introduced. The Convention makes sure that a vessel in distress is not only able to contact nearby Ships, but also that the vessel can be located by onshore organizations to send help. The required time SAR services needed to launch a mission were drastically reduced.

#### State of Search and Rescue after SOLAS 1974

Although the SOLAS 1974 provided the technical grounds for search and rescue, there was still disparity in the common practice of search and rescue. Some States were dedicated to provide well equipped and efficient SAR services. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution for example was one of the first institution to provide SAR. It is nowadays one of the biggest Organizations on earth, situated in and responsible for great Britain. ^[@RNLI2021.]
In other parts of the oceans there was little help to be anticipated for distressed people. There was a lack of technical possibilities and even a lack of motivation for some coastal States. The so called boatpeople in the south china sea could not rely on any help of the bordering States. It was only for european rescue missions in the south china sea to provide SAR services. [@ASHIP.]
SAR 1979 therefore aimed for unification by providing an international SAR plan and urged the neighbouring-states to cooperate for SAR where necessary.  

### SAR 1979

Because the SAR 1979 was amended several times, this part will regard to the SAR 1979 as amended (SAR 1979 a.a.) in 1998 (SAR 1998) and 2004 (SAR 2004). Especially the amendment from 1998 was of such size and importance, that it would be fruitless for the study of SAR to look at each amendment separately. Whenever one of the renewals is pertinent, it is going to be pointed out.  
This part of the chapter will examine the treaty and present its most important Regulations. Done so, the paper will then briefly simulate a distress Situation to sharpen the understanding of the different regulations playing together.
The treaty consists of eight formal articles and a technical annex, divided in five chapters which provide the specifications.

Special interest shall be paid to Art. III SAR 1979, which provides the Convention with a dynamic instrument to keep the Convention updated by usual amendments. The regulation is comparable with Art. 8 SOLAS 1974. ^[see 3.2 p. 7.] It includes two ways of shaping amendments. Either by proposals to the organization (Art. III 2 SAR 1979) or by a conference (Art. III 3 SAR 1979).
As well as in the SOLAS 1974 convention, if the amendment concerns certain Regulations, the amendment enters into force by a certain date if no party objects.

The first chapter, which was entirely renewed by the 1998 amendment, ^[@SAR1998.] serves the definition of the terms used in the annex. The definitions will be quoted everywhere necessary.

Chapter two ^[Chapter two was also entirely renewed in 1998 to clarify the obligations of the signing States except for Chapters 2.1.4, 2.1.5, 2.1.7, 2.1.10] inaugurates the organization and co-ordination of SAR operations.
By chapter 2.1.1 SAR 1979 as amended, parties shall develop SAR-services, either in cooperation with other states, with the organization, or individually. Rescue services by chapter 1.3.3 are defined as *distress monitoring, communication, co-ordination and search and rescue functions, including provision of medical advice, initial medical assistance, or medical evacuation*. These services are provided by *use of public and private resources including co-operating aircraft, vessels and other craft and installations*. The responsibilities are clear: the parties have to establish basic elements of SAR services. Such as

1. legal framework;

2. assignment of a responsible authority;

3. organisation of available resources;

4. communication facilities;

5. co-ordination and operational functions; and

6. processes to improve the service including planning, domestic and international co-operative relationships and training.

These obligations do not exhaust in establishing such services to the adjacent coast but apply to the whole sea as of Regulation 2.1.3 SAR 1979 a.a..
Regulation 2.1.3 SAR 1979 as amended is of paramount importance for the evolution of SAR. Parties to the convention shall establish SAR regions (SRR) within *each sea area*. These regions shall be established by agreement among the parties concerned. ^[de natura rerum the neighbouring States. To prevent impact of this provision to ongoing disputes regarding the delimitation of the Seas, 2.1.7 SAR 1979 as amended ensures these regions have no effect on the boundaries of states.] In these designated areas, the parties are responsible for the SAR-services and by 2.1.9 SAR 1979 as amended shall use SAR units and other available facilities for providing the services.  
This Regulation takes a big step to the unification of SAR services. It does not leave any "white dots". ^[See for a map of the SRRs @Homeland.] Albeit Art. 98 UNCLOS combined with Art. 58 II UNCLOS only makes the obligation to render assistance applicable to the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and the high seas,[@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 164.] the obligation applies to the whole sea. [@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 164; @Grandy1989Volume Fn. 98.11 g; @Barnes2004Refugee p. 52; @ProelssRescue p. 12; @Pallis2002Obligations p. 338.] This is because of two factors. The first: the unambiguous wording *persons* (...) *at sea* by various treaties. [see therefore @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 164; @SAR1979 as amended chapter. 2.1.10; @UNCLOS Art. 98 No. 1 lit. a.] The second being the statutory right of passage *for the purpose of rendering assistance to persons, ships or aircraft in danger or distress* from Art. 18 II UNCLOS through the territorial sea. This means the treaties are not limited locally.[@ProelssRescue p. 12; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 164.]

Therefore, appropriate national procedures shall be established by each party to develop, coordinate and improve SAR services by Chapter 2.2.1 SAR 1979 a.a. These procedures shall include planning, training and exercising SAR operations.

*To meet the requirements of* the SAR services, the parties shall *establish rescue Coordination centres* ^[@SAR1979 as amended 2.3.1.] (RCC) and sub-centers (RSC) where Appropriate by chapter 2.3 SAR 1979 a.a. Rescue Coordination centers are defined by chapter 1.3.5 and 1.3.6 SAR 1979 as amended as units, responsible for the *efficient organization* of SAR services and for coordinating the SAR operations in the designated Sea areas. Subcenters are units to complement the Coordination center where necessary. These centers are part of the GMDSS, to which the SOLAS 1974 introduced. ^[see 3.2.1 p. 8.]

The third chapter is designated to administer the cooperation between signing parties. The predominant interest of the founders is made clear in 3.1: *Parties shall coordinate their SAR ^[abbreviation by the author] organizations and should (...) coordinate* with the SAR services of the neighbouring states. Therefore, the concerned state should authorize *immediate entry into (...) its territorial sea (...) for the purpose of searching for the* people in distress. This provision is supported by Art. 18 II UNCLOS which includes entering foreign territorial sea for the purpose of rendering assistance to Vessels in distress into the right of innocent passage.  
The said state then remains responsible for the Coordination of the mission or designates another authority. Against the background of the importance of the timing factor of SAR missions, the Convention obliges the concerned states to take immediate action in such a situation to *indicate the conditions under which the projected mission may be undertaken*. Moreover, the convention urges the parties to enter into agreements to decrease the level of formalities needed for such an entry by chapter 3.1.5.  
Furthermore, the parties are obliged to ensure that the coordination centers cooperate with each other where it comes to rendering assistance to provide other centers with Vessels, personnel or equipment. (@SAR1979 3.1.8.) Also, the parties are to authorize the responsible authorities to make operational plans and arrangements for SAR missions with the corresponding authorities of other states. Additionally, the parties shall *coordinate* that masters of vessels providing assistance are released from their obligations as soon as possible, so they can continue their voyage. (3.1.9)

The intention of the writers of the convention are lucid in this context. The organization of such a critical situation as distress at sea is best dealt with by cooperating administrations. There shall be as little hinderance as possible for the success of such missions. Moreover, because distressed persons do not take national borders into account when getting in distress, the SAR response may do likewise to be efficient.

The most controversial evolution of the SAR framework was implemented in 2004. In the course of action of the *Tampa* ^[which is going to be addressed in 4.1 p. 17.] incident in Australia [@Australia2001Minister.] a question that evolved in the years before reached a decisive climax. What happens after a person in distress is safely aboard the rescuing vessel? The answer to this question was addressed in the 2004 amendment. It stated that rescued people are to be delivered to a place of safety. Howbeit because there is no definition of the place of safety in the amendment itself the regulation lacks certainty.[@BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 506; @Ratcovich2015concept p. 125-126.] A definition of a place of safety can be taken from chapter 6.12 of the IMO Guidelines. ^[for the character of the guidelines see 4.2 p. 18.] Thereby defined as *"a location where rescue operations are considered to terminate"*. Because there is no Person in distress anymore, And the person is saved. *It is also a place where the survivors' safety of life is no longer threatened and where their basic human needs (...) can be met. Further, it is a place from which transportation arrangements can be made for the survivor´s next or final destination*. Thus, the operation is not deemed to be terminated if the survivors are *no longer in immediate danger, once aboard the ship.* Rather, if the formerly distressed person is in a Place of safety, and therefore the rescue mission can be called successful, must be evaluated on a case by case decision. This is supported by the wording of the Guidelines as 6.15 states, that the decision if something is a place of safety needs to be a case by case decision. The place of safety may therefore be aboard a vessel, a facility at sea or the most widespread place: ashore.
Some authors state, that the rescue unit itself can only provisionally be the place of safety.[@Trevisanut2014Is p.6.] In fact, 6.13 of the IMO Guidelines "*An assisting ship should not be considered a place of safety based SOLELY on the fact that the survivors are no longer in immediate danger (...). Even if the ship is capable (...) and may serve as a temporary place of safety, it should be relieved of this responsibility as soon as alternative arrangements can be made*".  
Taken literally, a ship may be a place of safety if the reason therefore is not only the absence of lethal threat. People on a suitable Vessel are not in distress. If the capable ship could not represent a permanent place of safety, this would lead to odd results. As the term "temporary" means it vanishes after time. It is not clear what time a "temporary" time is. But as soon as the "temporary state" ceases, the vessel would become an unsuitable place of safety, thereby making it challenging to say in what status the person is in. If the person was in distress, the responsible SAR State would be obliged to perform SAR services. But SAR services are to be aimed at distressed people and the people on the vessel are *de facto* not in distress. In the opinion of the author it follows, that a Vessel can be a final place of safety until disembarked somewhere.

Even more ambiguous than the definition of the place of safety is the obligation of the State to bring the survivors to disembarkation. This issue is going to be addressed in [**chapter XX I dont know yet**]

Chapter five contains complementary provisions for the GMDSS by providing regulations for ship reporting systems. Against the background, that for the technical provisions of safety of vessels the SOLAS is the pertinent convention, chapter five focusses on the cooperation of states regarding ship reporting systems. It recommends, the reporting systems should be able to provide up to date information on the movements of vessels. The goal is to reduce the time between the distress signal and the successful rescue mission.

The fourth chapter introduces the International Maritime Search and Rescue Manual (IAMSAR).^[Note, that Chapter four is not the IAMSAR but sets the groundwork for it.] The every three years issued IAMSAR provides guidelines for an aligned approach to SAR services.

The SAR 1979 is the first convention not to focus on the prevention of distress at sea but on the way the reaction to a distress signal should be organized. How a distress signal is dealt with is part of an explanatory part in the following Paragraph.

#### Subjects to SAR and IAMSAR

The direct procedures considered for SAR in the IAMSAR are recommended in the second Volume. The third volume provides suggestions of actions for masters of vessels on their way. This volume has to be carried aboard the vessels at all times. It also provides suggestions regarding the training standards of the crews. The second volume provides an encyclopedic gathering of suggestions for the organizations concerned. As far as the SAR 1979 goes, it can be a mandatory part while the IAMSAR exhausts itself in a non-binding character.

#### The procedure of Search and Rescue

Crucial for the success of rescue missions is preparation. This principle appears in factors such as  
- Standards, which assure the safety of the vessels.
- Vessels has minimal equipment for the GMDSS.
- Governments establish RCCs and set an elaborate plan on how to proceed in every SAR situation.
- Every Crew and every RCC needs to be prepared and trained.

The procedures of the missions are divided into five stages ^[3.2 @IAMSARIII.] which include three emergency phases. ^[4.4 @SAR1979; 3.3 @IAMSARIII.]  These phases are applied according to practicability. They can coincide or be applied concurrently. Furthermore they do not necessarily begin with the first phase and do not go through all phases. For the use of this paper the author will present all phases in a serial way to give an impression on how an SAR mission could be exercised.  

1. Whenever an SAR organization (most commonly an RCC) receives knowledge of a possible SAR situation, the awareness stage is initiated. This stage includes the first and second emergency phases.  
2. The uncertainty phase ^[When a person has reported missing, a vessel is overdue or when an expected safety report fails] and the alert phase. ^[when attempts to establish contact with the person or Vessel in question has been unsuccessful or information has been received, that the Vessel is impaired.] The knowledge can be received by various installations of the GMDSS provided mainly by the SOLAS 1979. ^[see chapter 3.2.1 pp. 8-9] The vessel in distress may send a distress signal manually or automatically via EPIRB. Furthermore, if the RCC itself suspects a distress situation they can self-reliantly initiate the necessary stages. Since SOLAS 1974 (depending the type of the vessel) most vessels have to be equipped with VHF radiotelephone and DSC, SART ^[a radar transponder 2.5.10 IAMSAR] or AIS transmitters ^[a manually deployed device alternative to SART.] NAVTEX ^[a telex system for automated print of information received.] and EPIRB.  
The received information is evaluated and more information is to be gathered and subsequently distributed to everyone concerned. This may happen by the RCCs themselves or by nearby vessels reporting the situations.  

During the mission a second and a third principle can be observed in thorough cooperation and coordination which entails simplifying the proceedings, by in advance asigning someone responsible. The responsibility always has to be as clear as possible.

3. The following initial action,- and operation stages include the alert phase and the distress phase. ^[when positive information is received, that someone is in danger and need of immediate assistance or such a situation is probable due to unsuccessful communication attempts or that the vessel is impaired and most likely in a distress situation 4.4.3 @SAR1979 as amended.]  
4. The initial phase is the first stage of actual response. The gathering of information on the vessel continues. The most crucial task of the SAR from thereon is to locate the vessel in distress. Not knowing the location of the vessel can severely impair the success of the mission. Therefore, IAMSAR holds an extensive catalogue of actions in store on how to proceed with or without digital support.  
The procedure is the following: from a fixed datum, the last known position (LKP), has to be calculated. Even with the help of location service satellites such as COSPAS-SARSAT, INMARSAT and from 2020 on IRIDIUM ^[all part of the GMDSS] and helping vessels in the area, the LKP can result in a search radiant of five kilometers (three nautical miles). From that point on, the actual position has to be estimated.
The planned route of the ship, the sea and weather conditions, the swell and the drift from the currents have to be taken into consideration. These factors can affect the location drastically. This is all being taken care of by the responsible RCC.
The locating process forms part of the planning stage. The following operations stage includes the execution of the mission and in the best case delivering the saved people to a place of safety.
5. In the last stage, the conclusion stage, the mission ends. The participants then have obligations to report to their authorities. ^[Comprehensive explanations of the recommended course of action and details on how the on scene operation can be comprehended in the 2nd volume of the IAMSAR manual.]

## Right of Disembarkation

Albeit the comprehensive framework for the SAR missions there is a lack of regulations regarding actions to take once the survivors are onboard. The discussion of the scope of the right to disembarkment emerged with the rise of maritime migration. [@Kanade2016Don p. 5; @Coppens2010Towards p. 381.] When in the mid- 1970s and 80s many of the so called "boat people" fled from Vietnam and other communist regimes on the Asian-oceanic continent and frequently got in distress. Furthermore, the oceans became more accessible for private individuals and leisure yachts,[@Munari2020Search p. 70] instead of the historic seafarers which knew the perils of the sea and where greatly trained for merchant shipping on the high seas. [@Munari2020Search p. 69] Neither the refugees nor the leisure yacht-owners are traditional beneficiaries of SAR services. The first question to answer will be, if these individuals fall under the SAR conventions at all.

### Personal applicability of the SAR convention

SAR missions are targeted at persons or vessels in distress. As of Art. 98 UNCLOS no classification between rescues is permissible. The wording makes clear of this, by requiring the masters of vessels *to render assistance to* ***any*** *person found at sea*. [@Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 162; @Grandy1989Volume fn. 98.11 (b).] Furthermore, Art. 11 of the Brussels Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules with Respect to Assistance and Salvage at Sea (Convention on Salvage) from 1910 set rules to save everyone at sea regardless if they were enemies. ^[@1910salvageConvention Art. 11: *Every master is bound, (...) to render assistance to everybody, even though an enemy, found at sea in danger of being lost.*] This view has been implicated into today´s most influential treaties as seen in Annex 2.1.10 SAR 1979 a.a. ^[*Parties shall ensure that assistance be provided to any person in distress at sea. They shall do so regardless of the nationality or status of such a person or the circumstances in which that person is found.*]

Additionally, incidents involving the rejection of distressed people never questioned, if the people should be saved at all. [@Testa2014Safeguarding p. 556; @BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 393.] This can be called a clue that extending the search and rescue obligation to private individuals (in contrast to seafarers) grows part of the longstanding state practice of rendering assistance to people in distress.
As an example the Disembarkation Resettlement Offers Scheme (DISERO) from the 1970s can be named. DISERO was cooperation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and many states which prepared the allowance of disembarkation in exchange for guarantees that other states would grant permanent protection to the refugees.[@Coppens2010Towards pp. 381,382; @UNindo; @UNEXCOM.]
Moreover, in 2001, the *Tampa* incident ^[@Australia2001Minister.] which took place near the Australian Christmas islands shall be considered. The Australian RCC ordered the *Tampa* to rescue  people in distress. Later, Australia refused the ship to enter their territory, [@BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 499; @Kanade2016Don p. 15.] but as a first reaction they acknowledged the right of the distressed people to be rescued.
In comparison to this the so called "refugee crisis" in the Mediterranean which peaked in 2015 can be regarded to. However the question was also not if the people in distress had to be saved, but where they were to be embarked to.[@Kanade2016Don p. 26.]  
Moreover, one may say, that in addition to the state practice ^[see for the requirements for accepted customary international law @Krajewski2017Voelkerrecht §4 II.] of saving every person in distress it is not done voluntarily but because the State community recognizes it as a legal obligation.

Once clarified that every person in distress falls within the scope of the SAR regime, it is now time to analyse what obligations the states have regarding disembarkment of survivors.

### State duty to Disembarkation under the law of the Sea

The first legal foundation seems to be the law of the Sea as it constitutes the most specialized regulations for seafarers.  
The center of dispute poses 3.1.9 SAR 1979 a.a.

*Parties shall co-ordinate and co-operate to ensure that masters of ships providing assistance by embarking persons in distress at sea are released from their obligations with minimum further deviation from the ships´ intended voyage, (...) The Party responsible for the search and rescue region in which such assistance is rendered shall exercise primary responsibility for ensuring such co-ordination and co-operation occurs, so that survivors assisted are disembarked from the assisting ship and delivered to a place of safety,(...).*

The provision emphasizes the duty of the responsible state to coordinate and cooperate to release the assisting vessels of their duties. It is noticeable, that the "Search and *Rescue* convention" does not provide a definition to the term "assistance", although it is used in several important regulations such as 2.1.10 and 3.1.9 SAR 1979 a.a.  
Hence, it can be followed, that it contains a thinner scope of obligation than the term "rescue", which is defined as  
"*An operation to retrieve persons in distress, provide for their initial medical or other needs, and deliver them to a place of safety*"^[1.3.2 of the Annex to SAR 1979 a.a.].  
This has been criticized by some authors to be too narrow. ^[@ proelß2021 p. 11; @Talmon2019Private p. 808.] Although, it is comprehensible to criticize the regulation, as it will be seen, the term "rescue" could not have been used in the provision 3.1.9 SAR as amended as it contradicts the intention of the provision to release the masters of the assisting ships from their obligations to minimize deviation of the ships voyage. If the term "rescue" would have been used, the ships "rescuing" the distressed people would have been responsible to provide for the survivors needs and bring them to a place of safety other than the vessel itself. The same is true for regulation 2.1.10 SAR as amended as every vessel providing assistance would then be obliged to deliver the rescues to a place of safety contrary to 3.1.9 SAR 1979 a.a. ^[Although this is only important if it comes to private vessels saving the people.]

Regarding the *"primary responsibility"* of the States to ensure that co-ordination and co-operation *"occurs*",[@SAR1979 3.1.9.] so that disembarkation from the assisting ship to a place of safety takes place. Provision 3.1.9 SAR as amended makes by no means clear, what the operational measures are, that the responsible state is required to take.  
Some authors take the view the State had the duty to secure a certain result. ^[@Bank2011Introduction p. 827; @Testa2014Safeguarding p. 564; @Kanade2016Don p. 29.] Others say the disembarkation to a permanent place of safety is only mandatory for the responsible State of the SAR region if no other State offers disembarkation to their territory. [@GammeltoftHansen2011Access p. 143.] At least, as some say, this applies there are no other options.[@Trevisanut2014Is p. 7; the same in @Trevisanut2017Search pp. 426–450.]  
These opinions derive from the expressed intentions of the drafters ^[@BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 507; See therefore @SAR2004 preambular para. *‘REALIZING FURTHER’*.] and the interpretation of 2.5 of the Guidelines of the IMO. ^[@BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 507; @OrganizationPrinciples principle 3.] Although this seems alluring: at least the wording of 3.1.9 SAR 1979 a.a. is not open to that interpretation.[@GuilfoyleArt p. 729; @Papastavridis2020European p. 299; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 170; @BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 507.] One could argue that if the member states would have wanted to be obliged in any way, they would have written the same text from the guidelines into the convention.  

On the other hand paragraph 2.5 of the annex of the IMO guidelines stipulates the intention of 3.1.9 SAR 1979 a.a.

"(ensuring) *that in every case a place of safety is provided within reasonable time. The responsibility to provide a place of safety (...) falls on the Government responsible for SAR region in which the survivors were recovered.*".  

Taken literally the responsible State has to provide a place of safety. Howbeit, the IMO guidelines have no binding effect of its own. ^[@ proelß2021 p. 11; agreeing to this extend @Trevisanut2014Is p. 7; @Testa2014Safeguarding p. 572; @Barnes2004Refugee p. 63; @BerckelSmit2020Taking p. 507; @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche pp. 170-171; nevertheless, there are provisions contained which complete the 2004 Amendment and are thereby *quasi* binding.] This can be followed off the guidelines preamble which state the "adoption of the Guidelines" in contrast to the preamble on the 2004 Amendment which states an "adoption of amendments to the convention." Amendments are *planned reforms* with a legal basis of the convention, guidelines are not.  
It is therefore especially worth noting, that the text of the guidelines differ from the amendment text whenever it comes to wording, which could potentially be interpreted as being an obligation to the states. It would make no sense for the signing parties to on the one hand write non-obligating text in the convention just to be bond by another convention on the other hand.

Beyond the convention the States establish guidelines to appear more engaged in the matter knowing that they are legally bound only by the convention.

Moreover, 3.1.9 SAR1979 as amended itself outmaneuvres the guidelines as it states that the guidelines should only be taken "into account". ^[@SAR1979 as amended] The choice of wording displays the aspiration of the states quite unabashedly as it is very vague and has been therefore called a "diplomatic formula compromise" ^[@ proelß2021 p. 11; @Talmon2019Private p. 808.]

This has led some scholars to ask "*how a state responsible for the SAR region is supposed to fulfil the primary responsibility in ensuring cooperation and coordination leading to the survivors´ disembarkation to a place of safety when all other states blatantly refuse to allow the disembarkation"*.[@Testa2014Safeguarding p. 565.]
Although the background is understandable the question stops short in acknowledging the written obligations and the system of the Convention. The masters of the vessels are obliged to render assistance, and the states are explicitly solely obliged to coordinate and to cooperate with the goal of disembarkation to a place of safety. This is perfectly legitimate as the aim of the SAR 1979 a.a. is to bring situations of distress to an immediate end. In the end, the convention is a contract, made by the member States. Immanent to State sovereignty is that a State desires to be as less obliged as possible.

Finally, and without wanting to dig deeper into the topic of which port is supposed to be the most suitable, ^[see for an insight of the discussion on how to amend the convention: Italy and Spain proposing to change the convention text to "delivered to a place of safety under the control" of the responsible State whereas Malta proposes to change the convention to the effect that "disembarkation should occur in (...) that port closest to the location of the rescue" @Testa2014Safeguarding p. 549 ff; @FSISpain para. 4; @FSIMalta para. 6. These approaches are obviously geographically motivated.] it can be said that not always the port of the responsible state of the Rescue area is the one most suitable for the sake of SAR.[@Testa2014Safeguarding p. 592 f; @ P. Mallia and D.J. Attard, “Access to Ports for Ships in Distress: What of Disembarkation?,” Benedict’s Maritime Bulletin (2012): 85.**kein Zugang**] Therefore it can be said that there is need of a big scope of action as every SAR mission is different. And if the SAR 1979 a.a. was too strict in its obligations there was no room for these dynamics.

### State duty to Disembarkation under international refugee law

If a state duty to disembarkation exists, not under the law of the sea but under the principle of non-refoulment, is heavily debated amongst legal scholars. The principle of non-refoulment is said to constitute a *de facto* state duty to disembarkation on state territory in situations of saving refugees at sea.  
The principle of non-refoulment is stipulated in Art. 33 of the Convention Relating to the status of Refugees (Geneva Convention). Thereby, returning a refugee ^[some authors reserve this right only to asylum Seekers, e.g. @Testa2014Safeguarding p. 570; as others extend the applicability to refugees and asylum Seekers @GoodwinGill2011Right p. 232.] to territory where life or freedom would be threatened is prohibited. [@Nations1951Convention Art. 33.]

#### Inclusion of refugee law in the SAR framework

It seems, that this prohibition could derive from the SAR 1979 a.a. as well. This needs to be elaborated firstly. ^[One State obligation under SAR 1979 a.a. is the prohibition of push back operations in so far as the push-back operation concerns distress situation. In how far the maritime push-back operation scheme especially in the Mediterranean falls under the 2020 Judgement of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) is not going to be addressed here as questions of the law of the sea were not of regard as well as the Australian push-back scheme which is left completely untouched by this. @HumanRights2020ND.] At first glance, the convention provides regulations concerning this matter.  
Firstly, the IMO guidelines´ definition of a place of safety includes, that *the safety of life is no longer threatened*. ^[6.12 @IMOGuidelines.]  
Taken into consideration this is the only definition existing on the place of safety, the guidelines could be described as being partially binding. ^[Especially thereby noting that no direct obligation for the States derives from the definition itself.]   The wording "*no longer threatened*" can be conceived as that it only comprises threat that existed before and continues at the place where the person is brought to. This easily applies to distress at sea.  
Although strictly speaking the same can be said generally for the situation of a refugee: Formerly in danger in the country seeking refuge from, the refugee is then saved from this immanent threat. Brought back to the same place, the same threat continues. Even though it must be conceded that this interpretation is somewhat broad.
Bearing in mind the SAR framework regards situations from distress at sea the Guidelines are applicable exclusively concerning people in this situation.
Against this interpretation speaks the practical connection. If a person is left in distress by a vessel the SAR framework is triggered again. If 6.12 would only include threats immanent to the Sea, the regulation would make itself redundant.
Furthermore, Regulation 6.17 of the guidelines states, that the avoidance of disembarking survivors in territories, where the lives of those would be threatened are to be taken into consideration. This speaks against the inclusion of the prohibition of refoulment at least directly from the definition itself as 6.17 would be made superfluous thereon.

Because these questions only come to play when it comes to refugee law, the Regulations 6.19 and 6.20 of the IMO Guidelines have to be considered. These provisions stipulate "Non-SAR considerations". These considerations cover *survivors who are migrants or asylum seekers* [@IMOGuidelines 6.19]. Those are thereby handled by the *appropriate authorities, once the survivors have been delivered to a place of safety*. This does not obliges the responsible state to disembark the people to their territory. In fact, the regulation ensures to get rid of any application of SAR law once the people are in a place of safety.[@Kanade2016Don p. 22]

Following this, it can be concluded, that the principle of non-refoulment is not included in the SAR framework.

#### Disembarkation under general refugee law

The general rule out of the Geneva convention has to be applied therefore.  
The overall argument to conclude a (at least temporary) right of disembarkation under refugee law is as follows: because the Geneva convention in Art. 32 requires the parties to examine the status of each person which could possibly have a right to asylum. The refugees have to be brought ashore because this examination can not adequately take place on the vessel. ^[contra @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 179.] This argument is partially supported by the UNHCR Expert "Roundtable" when it comes to private vessels. The decision was taken, that non-governmental ships are inadequate for these examinations. ^[@UNHCRRefu Paragraph 7.]
Because the convention is applicable in the territorial waters, this view is agreed on by a majority regarding survivors who already entered these waters. ^[@ proelß2021 p. 21; @GoodwinGill2011Right p. 215; @Li2017Exclusion pp. 35-47; @Kanade2016Don p. 32; @ JHathaway, The Rights of Refugees under International Law (Cambridge Cambridge University Press 2005) 301 **vermisst in der bib**; not considering this comprise @Koukounakis2019Seevoelkerrechtliche p. 177 who says that the examination can always be done on a Ship.] This approach seems to be adequate as it contains appropriate solutions for the situations. A person entering the State on land territory can commit his claim more easily than one entering State territory by sea. Both refugees are entitled to the same possibilities of submitting their claim. Due to the principle of equal treatment this approach is adequate.  
Especially, if there are many people rescued at once it is often not possible for the State to examine the claims made by the refugees as easily. Also, these examinations have to be fair and effective [@HumanRights2012Hirsi p. 72 for further information.] and have to be open to effective remedies against the decisions. [@HumanRights2012Hirsi p. 72.] This leads to the practical obligation to disembark the survivors on the land territory as long as examination and lawful appeal go.  

Although the practical situation might be the same when refugees did not yet enter zones under state sovereignty, the legal debate is far more controversial. This is due to the extraterritorial applicability of the Geneva convention being ambiguos. [@ProelssRescue p. 22; @RefugeesInterception No. 23; @Giuffre2016 p.252-255.] If the convention is not to be applied in the EEZ or the High Seas, the outcome can not be the same.

### State duty to disembarkation under international human rights law

Another convention that is applicable in non-sovereignty areas is the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (UNCAT)

[@HumanRights2012Hirsi p. 129 "The Court observes that Italy cannot evade its own responsibility by relying on its obligations arising out of bilateral agreements with Libya. Even if it were to be assumed that those agreements made express provision for the return to Libya of migrants intercepted on the high seas, the Contracting States’ responsibility continues even after their having entered into treaty commitments subsequent to the entry into force of the Convention or its Protocols in respect of these States.] **wieso wollte ich das nochmal drin haben?**

It stipulates in Art. 3 that *No State Party shall expel, return ("refouler") or extradite a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture.*
Howbeit, this regulation is not as far reaching as Art. 33 in connection with Art. 32 of the Geneva Convention. There is no right to legal admission, no right to submit evidence and no right to appeal.  
The States can meet this obligation easily by disembarking the survivor to any country but the ones where it is known that torture is use. In the european context there are many countries which come into mind as a safe country in terms of the prohibition of torture. There is no reason why the necessary examination of this cannot take place on board of a vessel. Instead of a right to disembarkment to the refugees Art. 3 UNCAT rather stipulates a State prohibition.

### Conclusion to the right of Disembarkation

As this question is in effect only relevant concerning refugees, the SAR framework does not consider itself to be applicable. A right of disembarkation from a safe vessel to a particular place can therefore only result from other international law. There seems to be certainty regarding a right of disembarkation as long as the examination of the refugee status goes if this cannot be done on the vessel. Thus, this goes only under international refugee law, and therefore, if the refugee reached territorial waters of the State. If the person is saved from distress in the EEZ or the high seas, there is no right to disembarkation to a particular place. Although, the person has to be disembarked somewhere. If the Situation is, that there is no State willing to allow disembarkation in practise there are only a few choices left 1st disembarkation to the nearest port 2nd disembarkation to the port of the Flag State 3rd disembarkation to the responsible State of the SAR Region.
To conclude for others than refugees: as the same SAR framework applies, there is no legal obligation to be disembarked at a certain place. However, in contrast to refugees for example stranded leisure yacht owners do not plan on staying in the country which is the reason why the States do not have any motivation to stop them from entering their soil.

## Is SAR providing its own solutions?

To examine the next stages, the SAR System will be enter, the upcoming amendments are going to be analysed briefly to search for important changes especially regarding the discussed problem.

The only amendments important to SAR are some amendments regarding the SOLAS 1974 convention, which are going to enter into force in 2024. ^[ @OrganizationList last access 25.01.2021.] These amendments include regulations for the fire safety systems, life-saving appliances and general renovations of the requirements for lifeboats. Furthermore, Chapter 2 of SOLAS will be adopted and will then include regulations for mooring and towing arrangements.  
There are no changes made regarding the right of disembarkation. Concerning the ongoing discussion in Europe this comes not as a big surprise.
Nevertheless seeing that the SAR framework is adopting frequently is a good sign for the safety of the seas.

## What´s left to say

Overall, SAR has been a very successful evolution. From the beginning of the first written codification of the obligation to render assistance to persons in distress to an elaborate framework for merchant vessels. Even though rendering assistance at sea is still very complicated due to the size and sea-immanent difficulties of the ocean, the safety of going to sea has consequently increased a lot. As nowadays more and more people are going to sea just for leisure activities.
Therefore, the consignees of SAR services, as it comes to the SAR 1979 a.a., have changed significantly. The States now have to provide their services to people which the States did not include initially.  
It may come to question if a new system of compensation, e.g. an insurance for every ship registered in the member States, should be established. In case the responsible SAR State is affected i.a. environmentally, the State would not have the sole financial burden. ^[This has been brought up by imminent scholars from Canada and Sweden. See @Drewniak2018Expansion pp. 440; @Moen2010those p. 409; @Munari2020Search p. 76 who brings up the idea of a compensation.]

In light of the far more controversial lack of regulation that the SAR framework pertains, finding a legal solution to the right of disembarkation seems desirable.
A clear separational line must be drawn to distinguish between the question of a right to disembarkation of non-refugees and refugees.  
For the former category there does not seem to be a problem concerning disembarkment. There is no need for an additional Regulation or framework as the distress situation is over and the survivor will at some point be disembarked to a place from whereon the survivors can get to their final destination.
For the latter category (refugees), the lack of a binding regulation is far more concerning. Waiting on a vessel for several weeks is a possible result of being rescued at sea. Because the situation is so different to when non-refugees are rescued, it does not seem to be the right step to solely apply SAR Law to these situations. SAR´s function has always been to improve safety at sea and rescue missions. Therefore, there has been improvements of the construction and the equipment of vessels. SAR missions´ only intention is to save the person from distress and bring them to a place of safety. The question if a person who is planning to stay for a long period of time at the place disembarked to, additionally making an asylum claim and therefore drastically speaking is a burden for the State is not a question that the SAR framework should be applicable to.

A few options of new regulations can be considered.
1. Additionally to the definition of a Place of safety, a legal obligation to the SAR conventions could be amended stipulating the obligation to disembark survivors at a certain place. Although this proposal will presumably not be met with applause as even the 2004 amendment to the SAR 1979 was not ratified by States such as Malta. As examined the amendment does not include much binding obligations towards the States. These States will probably not ratify an obligation to disembark survivors. Furthermore the question what the best suitable place of safety would target the discussion as there is a variety of possibilities.[see chapter 3.3 p. 13]
2. Alternatively to changing the SAR framework a way of providing framework could be the establishment of a set of rules concerning the special situation of refugees at sea. This could result in an obligation to firstly grant the rescuing vessel entry into the port and secondly let the refugees enter the territory. This would have to be complemented by the other states to come towards the State of first entry and distribute the asylum seekers and refugees among each other. This approach would best work with many States in near geographical and or political proximity because States far from sharing politically or geographically adjacency would supposedly not be open to such a collaboration. This approach is currently discussed between the EU member States [@Comission2020Proposal.] and is maybe a good way of balancing State interests albeit more efficient ways of dealing with migration can be observed in dealing with the root of migration. For now, situations such as in the Mediterranean, multilateral agreements seem to be the most suitable ways to encounter such delicate situations.  
Regarding the research question it can be said that except for the mainly self-inflicted problem of disembarkation the SAR framework keeps on updating and implementing new regulations to reduce the dangers at sea.

## References
